Book of Melchizedek

The Book of Melchizedek is an English translation of one of the Dead Sea Scrolls found in
cave number 11, in the Qumran desert, north of the Dead Sea. Some call it the Great
Melchizedek Roll, since in its original state, it consists of a set of 7 rolls sewn together.

According to sources related to this Great Roll and what is read in the manuscript, the
first scroll that appears in the compendium was written by Abraham, the same character
we found in the Book of Genesis in the Bible. This scroll was recorded by Abraham’s hand
in obedience to YAHAWAH’s divine mandate, and recounts the events that occurred long
before and long after the Great Liberation that YAHAWAH made through Abraham and his
shepherds, on that occasion when he was released Lot and the other captives who had
been taken prisoner as a result of the battle recorded in Genesis CHAPTER 14. This first
story recorded by Abraham is known as The Story of a Vase. Abraham was also
commanded to record the Salem Story, which he would listen to and receive “from the
lips of Melchizedek”, telling the most relevant events of that Beloved City. CHAPTER 13 of
Salem’s Story is a direct connection to the following story called The History of the
Universe, since in that CHAPTER the context in which the revelation was received
through the angel of Light was explained. This History, we understand from the source,
and as recorded in these rolls, was written by Melchizedek and recorded in six rolls that
were sewn one by one along with the first scroll written by Abraham. The History of the
Universe is a revelation that Melchizedek received through “a luminous angel” or angel
of Light, and which he was recording in those six scrolls for six years.



The path that leads us to the Book of Melchizedek



Our history
We are researchers of the sacred writings for more than two decades, a work that we
have done voluntarily and selflessly, because the main reason for getting involved in this
mission lies in the genuine and unique value that the knowledge contained in these
treasures of Scripture represents for us . As we became familiar with this type of
bibliography, we gradually learned some of the characteristics of these ancient writings.
We began to unite parts of the human history of the earth, as these Holy Books reveal,
and we realized that each of them provided us with a unique piece of valuable
information that was helping us to assemble the puzzle of a more complete history of
everything related to the human being, who he is, where he comes from and where he is
going.

By following in the footsteps of some important characters and events narrated in these
writings, we recognize that these books have a limit of information about the story of
certain characters and events. By having more scriptures, we were able to delve deeper
into those same events and get to know those characters better, so that we have
learned to recognize this fundamental principle, relate various sacred books in order to
have a greater source of information to help us to reach a broader view on the topics
contained in these writings.

One of the important characters in sacred literature is Melchizedek, king of Salem.
Because of the information we had about him, there was a strong desire in us to learn
more about how he established Peace in Salem.

Also, another mystery that we had been looking for was related to music, because even
at that time, before discovering the Melchizedek Great Roll, our experience in music as a
fundamental part to favor harmony between people, we understood that there was a
Mysterious past concerning the Divine origins of music. One of the first words in the Book
of Melchizedek, which touched our musical heart, were:

“The subjects of Salem would not wield bows and arrows, but they would be trained in
musical art; Each inhabitant of Salem would always have at his fingertips a musical
Instrument, to express through him the peace and joy of that new kingdom. Together,
they would form a powerful orchestra in the fight against disharmony born of pride and
selfishness. “ (H. Salem 1: 4)

We were amazed that what we had experienced and loved in our musical life, now the
Eternal revealed us about a beautiful city and a unique town, where music was
considered with such importance, and fundamental in the preservation of the peace of
that kingdom . Then we would find out in the History of the Universe, about an even
more ancient past, when the Creator “idealized” His Creation so that he could “vibrate
harmonious chords of justice and peace” (H. Univ. 1: 2).

One of the most important issues in our search for sacred knowledge, were the
descendant of life or state “before the foundation of this world”, as well as the
descendant during the Fall of Adam and Eve, both related subjects, knowing We, that the
broader knowledge of both issues could help us to understand more clearly our present
and what will be in the future.

Revelations, Mysteries and Prophecies in the Book of Melchizedek



After receiving and scrutinizing the contents of the Great Melchizedek Roll, and after a
process of conversion to the new revelations that were being unveiled before our
understanding, we experienced the reality that when this wonderful manuscript came to
light, it was marking a point in the time, a before and after in human history, it will be
possible to say, “what was known before the Book of Melchizedek came to light”. And
this we can testify because of the portion of knowledge that the Eternal had granted us
to reach before finding the Book of Melchizedek.

Even today, all those who sincerely wish so, can verify this fact, by carefully observing
what was known in the world regarding GOD’s Plan for His children, and making a simple
comparison of what we can now know thanks to the appearance of the Book of
Melchizedek, thanks to the blessings that the Eternal grants us in this our generation by
revealing more of His Word.

We understand from personal experience that the people who finally receive in their lives
the Book of Melchizedek as Sacred Scripture, will have reached it until after traveling a
path of conversion to the additional Light that the Creator reveals in this manuscript,
since it will expand knowledge true previously received in His other Scriptures.

By becoming familiar with the character of the sacred scriptures, we have learned that
these Holy Books defend themselves, and challenge the world with their revelations,
mysteries and prophecies. The men of this world, throughout history, have fought
against the authenticity and truthfulness of the Holy Scriptures, and have devised so
many ways to discredit each knowledge, each revelation, each prophecy, each mystery,
each miracle contained in them. , thus disparaging the Author of these truths, the Source
of Light.

It is also known by many about all those misinterpretations of Scripture that some in the
world have scattered, and it is natural that when the Light of the sun rises, the Darkness
of the Night contrasts with it. So, it will be natural that when the Light contained in the
Book of Melchizedek is revealed, many who had been in some degree of Darkness,
whether due to ignorance or to errors of scriptural interpretation, have two paths to
decide to follow, one would recognize with humility his ignorance or his error and with all
wisdom receive the Light of the Book, and the other way would be that of rejection, and
as with the Darkness, having to be on the opposite side fighting against the Light and
fade or flee when it manifests clearly.

All those who love the Truth will find in the Book of Melchizedek much of the truths they
had been searching for a long time. Who has not longed to know his personal origin?
Who has not longed to meet the One who gave us Life, the One who formed the
Universe? Why are we in a fallen world if in the beginning it was not so? What was the
descendant “before the foundation of this world”? What will be the end of all this
Universal Drama in the future? They are just some of the truths revealed by this sacred
record.

Our sincere prayer is that the Truth is close to the Truth, we know that those who strive
to live in the Truth will receive these Truths contained in the Book of Melchizedek, for
they will be sweetly savored by them, since they are of their own nature. Those who
have loved the Truth and sought It during their lives will have great reasons to rejoice
over the “good news of great joy” they will receive from this precious Book. When the
veil is discarded before them, and the Father and the Son manifest the Revelations of His
Love, their hearts will cry, for they will know that They remain The Same, and will know
the True Nature and Character that They have maintained from the beginning, will prove
to a large extent the Love with which They have loved them from the beginning.

Oh! How to hold back my tears before the Gifts of His Love? My heart overflows by
recognizing and considering me to be “the weak of the world”, and in this humble
condition the Eternal still works through our conduit. My brother and I do not imagine
much less plan all this that the Lord has granted us concerning the mysteries and
revelations of the Book of Melchizedek. It is His Work that is done, not ours. We bless the
path that will begin all those who receive these things with sincerity of heart, humility
and faith. The Messiah, He who loved us from the beginning, He whom we loved from the
beginning, will manifest the Eternity of His Love through His words recorded in the Book
of Melchizedek, our beloved Book.




Credits
The Book of Melchizedek

A Revelation of the True Character of the Messiah

Authors of the Spanish translation:

Isaac Ramírez Vargas and Ezequiel Ramírez Vargas

Taken from the Portuguese version of

Enoch Mucheroni

Spanish translation: Isaac Ramírez Vargas, and Ezequiel Ramírez Vargas.

Analysis, references, concordances, abbreviations, graphs and typographic
characteristics by: Ezequiel Ramírez Vargas and Isaac Ramírez Vargas.

Translation, analysis, references, concordances, abbreviations, graphs and typographic
characteristics ensured according to the law. The partial or total reproduction of this work
is prohibited without the written authorization of the author or authors.

Printed in Monterrey Nuevo León Mexico December 2010

03-2010-092710012600-01
Preliminary explanation

The order in which these stories are presented here follows the sequence according to
the divine model that was followed in the original scroll, thus fulfilling the command that
YAHAWAH gave to Melchizedek and Abraham in this regard. The sensitive reader will be
able to perceive the wise purpose of said commandment by following the reading in that
same order.

This sacred record has a precise and defined structure, and in its analysis it shows
multiple features of its originality, not only in its style, but also in the archaic symbology
it uses, where it would appear to be describing geroglyphic images rather than words, as
well as in the use of pleonasms and analogies, as was the common use in the oldest
languages, and whose semitic features are compared to those found in the Bible and in
other books of equal origin.

On the other hand, some verses cite quantities which are written in the form of numbers:
40, 260, 144 etc. Also some words begin with an uppercase letter even when they do not
appear after a period or the word does not merit as a rule start with a capital letter. In
addition, quotes, double or triple exclamation points are used, as well as how to combine
an interrogation with an exclamation at the same time. In such cases, whether they are
numbers, capital letters or expression signs, we have decided to leave them in the
original form in which we find this work written. The reader can find important meanings
in the emphasis made on certain expressions, words or phrases.

The abbreviations we use in this work to refer to a biblical quotation, we use the
commonly known ones, and to refer to the stories and chronologies contained in this
book, we identify them as follows:

H. Vase The History of a Vase

H. Salem Salem’s Story

H. Univ. The History of the Universe

Chrono 1 Chronology 1

Chrono 2 Chronology 2

Chrono 3 Chronology 3
As we delve into the content of these stories, we understand the relevance of
“analogies” as a guide map that the Universe offers us, revealing through similarities,
the location we have in time within the story to be fulfilled, that is, , the events and
characters of the past are an “analogy” or “likeness” that correspond to the events and
characters of the present and the future. The particular mention that the roll makes
about certain numbers, measurements, and significant festivities, motivated us to the
need to graph in a simple way, the chronological order in which events came to be
consummated in the past, repeating its corresponding “analogy” in the present and in
the future. (See Chronology 1, 2 and 3) We should not confuse what we call “analogy”
with “predestination or preordination.”

The graphic chronologies were not part of the original scroll or the Portuguese version on
which this translation was made, but were designed and added to facilitate a better
understanding of it, and were placed at the end of the Abraham scroll because they were
Taken from his writings.

The heading of each story, the synopsis of each CHAPTER, the numerical assignment of
each paragraph or verse, and the biblical references and other sacred books, all these
were added to present more clearly the writings of the scroll.




Acknowledgement

We thank Enoch Mucheroni for allowing us to carry out this translation and for the
valuable help that through his website provided us with free access to his extensive
information; as well as the Huntingdon Library of Los Angeles California. To Pedro
Gringoire for his valuable research and clear information that have helped many
scholarly researchers to value the scrolls and the finding itself. And for greater
intellectual enrichment, we recommend to the reader extensively the informative
articles, books and internet content from these sources related to these topics. We also
thank all those who have somehow contributed to the realization of this work.

Our true intention is to publish with honor the word of the Lord as far as He has revealed
and we are aware that he will still reveal more of His word, and we remain open to the
knowledge that comes to our hands either by archaeological discoveries or the way in
which please the Lord to reveal His words.

We will greatly appreciate the comments and suggestions that the reader may have to
express to us about this work, in order to correct any human error committed in the
translation and preparation of this book for future editions.

Thank you.
Isaac Ramirez Vargas

Ezequiel Ramirez Vargas




The History of the Vase

(A story written by Abraham)

Abraham, having received the commandment of YAHAWAH, writes in a scroll the events
that gave rise to the history known as The History of a Vase, which tells the facts that
framed The Great Liberation that the Lord made through Abraham, his Pastors and allies.
(See Chrono. 1, 2 and 3)



CHAPTER 1

(Abraham is informed of the battle in which Lot and many are taken captive. Abraham
receives commandments from the Eternal in order to effect the “Great Liberation,” that
is, to summon and prepare his shepherds, and prepare a vase with special
characteristics. )

1 I was resting under the shadow of the Mambre Oak next to my tent, when I saw one of
the servants of my nephew Lot arrive hurriedly. Almost out of breath, he began to tell me
about the tragedy: There was a battle between the cities of the plains the day before,
involving four kings against five. As a result, Sodom was defeated and many of its
inhabitants taken captive, including my nephew Lot. The news left me very distressed,
because at the same time that I felt it was necessary to come out to his aid, I was fragile,
without any conditions.

2 I was always a peaceful man and I hate those who shed blood. I have many servants,
but few know how to handle swords and spears, since childhood they have been trained
as shepherds. Instead of swords and spears, they handle curbs with which they lead the
flocks; Instead of shields, they carry glasses on their waists, always full of fresh water, to
kill their thirst and refresh the afflicted sheep; Instead of wine to get drunk, they load
subject to their belts small pots with olive oil, with which they anoint the wounds of the
flock; Instead of resonating trumpets, they blow in small horns, with which they summon
the flock to the corral.

3 Imagining what a battle would be like between my servants and the armies of those
five victorious kings, I began to laugh. While I was reflecting, the voice of the One who
always guides me echoed in my ears, saying:

4 – Abram, Abram! Do not disparage the instruments of the shepherds, for they are
sanctified by the fire of sacrifice, they will conquer the great liberation. –

5 The Eternal began to give me orders, making me advance by faith, without knowing
how such liberation was to be realized.

6 The first step was the convocation of all the shepherds who, leaving their flocks, went
to the Mamre Oak, bringing their pastoral instruments. There were a total of six hundred
pastors.

7 I ordered the jugs to be emptied, placing the oil in the jar.

8 After fulfilling this order, I asked that each one take the wool of a sheep, mixing it with
the oil from the jugs.

9 After these things, YAHAWAH commanded me to take a large vase of clay, filling it
halfway with olive oil.

10 At the end of this task, the Lord commanded me to make a long wick of wool, curling
half in the oil and leaving the other part held on top of the vase.

11 After these things, YAHAWAH ordered me to light the fuse, with the fire of the altar. As
I approached the sacred fire that still burned on the morning sacrifice, a small flame
jumped towards the fuse, and little by little it was feeding on the oil, until it became a
flare that could be seen from afar.



CHAPTER 2

(Abraham carries the vase on his shoulders. Sufferings and trials in his journey. Many do
not bear shame and abandon Abraham. Unbelief of Sarah.)

1 With the vase on my shoulders, I started a walk towards the cities of the plain, being
accompanied by the shepherds. Then mockers began to emerge that, seeing me with
that incandescent vase in broad daylight, began to say that I was crazy. As this news
spread, many came to meet me, bringing advice for me to abandon that vase that would
be able to destroy all my reputation and dignity in front of them all.

2 When I told them about the armies and about my joint mission with the shepherds,
they concluded that in fact I was crazy. They tried to throw me the vase by force, but
holding on to it, I prevented them from throwing it at me.

3 Embarrassed by all this, many pastors began to separate: some returned to their tents
while others joined those who laughed at my strange behavior.
4 Feeling alone with that heavy vase on my shoulders, I began to anguish myself. I
longed to find someone with whom I could share my experience, but everyone gave me
disapproving looks.

5 I remembered Sara, my beloved wife; In obedience to the voice of YAHAWAH we had
traveled many ways, being Sara always by my side, encouraging me to continue
precisely in the most difficult moments. Certainly Sara would bring me comfort and
strength to continue firm, leading the vase of salvation.

6 While I was walking along the road thinking about Sara, I saw her in the middle of the
crowd. When I addressed her, I was surprised and discouraged to see in her eyes the
same contempt of those who called me crazy for driving in the middle of the day the
flame that had come off the altar.

7 Remembering YAHAWAH’s order that I would have to free my nephew Lot, I walked
alone along the road; When I put myself in the place of those who called me crazy, I gave
them the reason, because under normal conditions, no coherent person would leave the
house, without a definite course, carrying a vase with a flare on the back, claiming to be
marching against the armies of five kings, to free a relative. It really implies that it is the
manifestation of great madness. Precisely so, under the grudge of all the humiliations
and words that spoke against me, I was moving towards the unknown valley.

8 All that mockery was finally diminishing, as I distanced myself from the Mamre Oak.

9 Many doubts about my future began to come to my heart. He was sometimes afflicted
with the thought of everything he had experienced, from the convocation of the
shepherds until that moment, it could be, in fact, demonstrations of madness.

10 Full of doubts, I began to think about the possibility of leaving the vase next to the
road, returning to the altar. Those were the advice of some pastors and friends who, still
in solitude, still came to meet me, advising me to return; There, they said, that I could
again conquer the trust of the shepherds, returning to be, perhaps, even the same
honorable priest as before. On the altar, they said, there was a fire much greater than
the one I carried on my shoulders.

11 I was about to return, when Sara came to meet me, telling me about the contempt
that many pastors threw at me; She was dismayed, because all that dishonor, also fell on
her, to the point of not feeling more desires to remain next to that altar.

12 After alerting me, Sara began telling me about a plan: We could, perhaps, move to a
distant city, where we would forget all those vexations.

13 Forgetting the voice that had sent me on my way to the plain, I replied to my wife
that I would be willing to accompany her anywhere, if she allowed me to take the vase.
He would be our altar, heating and lighting our nights with his flame.

14 Upon hearing about the vase, Sara became angry again, claiming not to understand
my stubbornness by continuing to carry on her shoulders that symbol of shame and
contempt. After telling me such words, he turned his back on me back to the store.
CHAPTER 3

(Abraham understands the meaning of the vase. Abraham protects the little flame from
the cold winds. Many sheep follow Abraham. Abraham, walking alone, follows the trail.
The armies mock Abraham and threaten the extermination of the captives.)

1 Distressed at not being able to realize Sara’s dream, I continued towards the uncertain
future, being oriented only by the flame, whose brightness increased as the darkness
grew denser. Then I began to meditate on that flame that accompanied me with its
brightness and heat.

2 I was used to seeing the Sacred Fire enthroned on a great altar of stones, in the midst
of the praises of many pastors, among whom I stood out as a teacher and priest. In those
moments of adoration, I dressed in the best mantles, and asked the question of making
the sacrifice, only when all my servants were gathered around me, to listen to my advice
and warnings. At the time of the sacrifice, I lifted my drawn sword to the sky, and, with
frightening words, proclaimed the greatness of the Lord of Armies, The Almighty GOD
who rules over Heaven and Earth. Vibrating the sword in the air in a menacing
movement, I represented in front of my shepherds, the image of a severe GOD, who is
always ready to repel any confrontation. After that demonstration of sovereignty and
power, I took a sheep from the hands of a shepherd, and tied it on the altar. So that the
divine wrath was very clear, I punctured on her neck, hitting her severely, until I saw her
perish. At that moment I descended from the altar, and remained waiting for the Sacred
Fire that never stopped manifesting itself on the sacrifice.

3 I had learned since childhood to revere the Sacred Fire, believing that it was a visible
revelation of YAHAWAH, the Great Invisible GOD. Until then, I saw it as a Unique and
Indivisible Fire. Now, by transporting in a humble jar the flame that had come off the
altar, my thoughts stirred with the emergence of a new concept about the Creator: the
concept of a Suffering GOD who is able to part with the Great YAHAWAH, represented by
the Sacred Fire, to accompany the sinner in his journey.

4 Repentant, I fell down in front of the vase and cried bitterly. I was now aware that all
the zeal shown by the Altar was aimed at the exaltation of my pride, and not the love of
the One who accompanied me along the way.

5 Suddenly, I was reminded in my mind that the little flame that had come off the Sacred
Fire, was a representation of the Messiah, who would part with the Great YAHAWAH, to be
the GOD With Us, companion in all our journeys. Upon this conviction, the flame rejoiced,
becoming brighter and hotter.

6 With my heart transformed, I continued along the path to the valley, carrying on my
shoulders the jug that had brought me after so much contempt, the joy of a new
revelation about the character of the Creator.

7 Difficult moments began to emerge in my path, when cold winds from the salty sea
began to lash out at the little flame, in an effort to extinguish it. I protected it with my
body, walking many times on my side and also on my back, but always moving towards
the valley.

8 When the daylight broke, I found myself one step away from the plain. I began to find
many flocks along the way that were led by rude shepherds. As I moved between them,
tumults and confusion arose, as many sheep and goats were scared with my burning
vase, scattering everywhere. This made most of the pastors irritated against my
presence in their midst.

9 Knowing that I could not remain held in that valley, I went straight on towards Sodom.
As I progressed, something interesting began to happen: many sheep, tender and
submissive, began to accompany me. They were few at first, but little by little their
number was increasing, until I began to walk with difficulty, due to the large number of
sheep that followed me. In the distance I could see the shepherds, enraged, for the loss
of their prettiest sheep.

10 When I arrived at the City of Sodom, I found it empty and devastated. Following the
trails left by the armies and the multitude of captives, I was getting closer and closer to
the target of my mission. When I reached Dan’s countryside, I could see the great
soldiers’ camp in the distance, at the foot of a hill. Without hurry, I headed there, leading
to my new flock.

11 From the top of the mountain, I could observe the camp in its entirety. There were
thousands of soldiers commemorating their victory; Meanwhile, hundreds of captives lay
in the middle of the camp, humiliated and hopeless. Before that scene, I was imagining
how the liberation could be realized.

12 My presence aroused the curiosity of some soldiers who, when they saw me with the
fumigant vase, approached and began to mock. When they asked me the reason for my
presence in that place, I told them that I was coming to free my nephew Lot. My words
became the reason for many jokes throughout the camp; After this, they began to mock
Lot.

13 In a short time, all that mockery was transformed into cries of revenge, and they
proclaimed that, the next morning, all the captives would be exterminated, starting with
my nephew.

CHAPTER 4



(Abraham is comforted by the arrival of his shepherds and allies. The shepherds learned
to love the light of the Vase. Loyalty of Abraham’s allies. Guided by the Divine Voice,
Abraham gives strategic instructions. Lot’s lamp. Confusion and killing between the
enemy armies.)

1 While trying to imagine what YAHAWAH could do to achieve such a miraculous
liberation, I saw a group of shepherds coming in my direction, coming from Sodom. I
thought at the beginning that they were the enemy shepherds who came to pluck the
flock conquered with love. Such distrust soon disappeared, giving rise to a feeling of
great joy, when I discovered that they were my faithful pastors. They approached in
small groups of twelve, reaching a total of 300 pastors. Looking at them, I could see in
their countenance the signs of a great spiritual struggle that they had to face, to be on
my side. They told me about the experience of many colleagues who, discouraged, had
thrown the oil and wool out of their glasses, returning to their tents. They told me about
how, on that previous night, they had learned to love the light of my vase, which for
them became like a guiding star.

2 I was glad with the presence of my humble shepherds, when our Aner, Escol and Manre
arrived in the direction, accompanied by fifteen armed men; They were faithful friends
who, knowing the dangers we would face in that valley, came to our aid. So that we
would not postpone the divine plan, I asked them to remain hidden until dawn, when
they would receive guidance on how to participate in the mission.

3 I began to orient the shepherds, following the instructions of The Divine Voice that
sounded to me from within the flame: The first task of the shepherds would be to take
care of the flock until nightfall.

4 When I returned, I ordered that they tie the skeins of wool soaked in oil, on the tip of
their curbs, placing them inside the glasses that should be kept suspended, face down.

5 I began to light them with the fire of my flare, until the three hundred torches were
burning, though, hidden, inside those vases.

6 I ordered forty of my courageous shepherds who, at the time indicated by a sign that
would be given, should advance silently towards the center of the camp, circling all the
captives that lay in the middle of the troops’ camp. At the same time, the remaining 260
shepherds should surround the entire camp, waiting for the signal to break the glasses
with the horns.

7 Oriented by The Voice of the Flame, I indicated the signs: When the last torch went out
in the camp, they should be attentive, since a small lamp would be lit by one of the
captives. As soon as the lamp began to burn, everyone should run to their position,
avoiding any noise, so as not to be discovered.

8 The signal for them to break the glasses with the horns, raising the torch very high,
would be to extinguish the lamp.

9 After those orientations, the 260 shepherds, hidden by the shadows of the night,
scattered throughout the valley, and were waiting for the moment to place themselves
around the camp; Meanwhile, the 40 were placed next to a more vulnerable passage,
through which they would reach the captives.

10 It was already late at night when the torch of the last soldier was extinguished, a
complete darkness and silence over the troops’ camp.
11 Among the captives, there was a man on that night, who lived the greatest anguish of
his life. It was my nephew who, after becoming the target of so many abuses and
humiliations, had learned of the punishment that awaited them at dawn.

12 On that night, Lot had his thoughts turned to his uncle; He remembered with regret
the moment he had left me next to the Mamre Oak, moving to the Sodom countryside. In
desperation, he felt the desire to see my face again and to apologize for having turned
away from me. Just then, Lot was attracted by the glow of a torch burning on the hill.
When he looked at the glow, he imagined he was having a vision, for it revealed the face
of his dear uncle.

13 Wanting to show me his face, Lot felt in the midst of darkness until he found a small
lamp he had brought in his saddlebag. Frustrated, he sensed that there was no oil in it.
He concluded that the dry and dull lamp was a symbol of his empty and faithless life.

14 Without diverting his eyes from my face lit by the flame of the vase, in a desperate
gesture of faith, Lot felt the wick of his lamp, discovering that there was an oil residue in
it. Curving, he began to hurt the stones of the fire, until a spark jumped towards the fuse.
Without knowing it, Lot was commanding with his gestures, the steps to a great
liberation.

15 When the three hundred shepherds saw the dim glow of the lamp, they quickly
headed towards their posts, and remained waiting to extinguish the small flame.

16 From the moment Lot got up with his tiny flame, I was looking into his eyes that
looked at mine. I saw that his face brought signs of unspeakable anguish and ill-
treatment. Likewise, I could read in his blue eyes that hope and faith had not yet left
him.

17 The little fire in Lot’s lamp, however, would not resist for long. It was necessary to
turn it off, to signal the great victory.

18 When darkness covered Lot’s face again, my three hundred shepherds lashed their
horns against the vases that kept burning torches hidden. A great noise, like cavalry in
combat, echoed everywhere, while the torches were suspended. The three hundred
horns used until then to lead the flock, now sounded like trumpets of conquerors.

19 The whole camp woke up in one jump, and, not knowing how to escape from such a
terrible investing that it started from the outside and inside, the soldiers began to fight
among themselves, while my shepherds remained in their posts, sounding the horns

20 The captives were very frightened at first, but little by little they became aware of the
great liberation that was operating in their favor.

21 When it dawned, a scene of complete destruction was revealed before our eyes; The
whole town was covered by thousands of bodies torn by their own swords and spears.
Only a few managed to flee that death camp, but they were persecuted by my eighteen
allies who were armed, being reached in Hoba, which is to the left of Damascus,
meanwhile, the captives, now released, recovered all the riches from which They had
been looted by enemies.



CHAPTER 5

(The Great Liberation represents the liberation of Israel in the last days. Abraham
discovers that The Great Liberation was concretized in Rosh Hashanah. Abraham
preaches the faith in the Messiah to the liberated captives inviting them to purify
themselves in water, only three accept him. Abraham rejects the offer of the king of
Sodom. Abraham and the faithful decide to commemorate the festival of Sukot in Salem.
The Pearls of the Vase. Festive welcome in Salem. The meeting of Abraham and
Melchizedek. (See Chrono. 1, 2 and 3))

1 From the top of the hill, while I vibrated with the joy of the captives on that morning of
liberation, I heard the Voice of YAHAWAH speaking to me in the middle of the flame:

2 – “This liberation that is concretized today, represents the liberation that I have to
operate in the last days, saving the remnants of your children, from the siege of
numerous nations that will ally themselves with Gog in order to destroy them. On that
day when they triumph over my people, my indignation will be very great, and I will
contend against it through the plague and the blood; Flooding rain, great rocks of hail,
fire and brimstone I will make fall on him, on his troops and on his many towns that were
with him. Thus, I will magnify myself, justify my holiness and make myself known in the
eyes of many nations; and they will know that I am the Lord. And on the house of David
and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem I will pour out the Spirit of thanks and supplications;
they will look at me whom they pierced, and will lament as one who laments for an only-
begotten son and will cry for him as one who cries bitterly for the firstborn. On that day,
there will be an open source for David’s house and for the inhabitants of Jerusalem, to
remove sin and impurity. “-

3 Aware of the historical importance of that day of liberation, I took a calendar and
looked with surprise, for it was Rosh Ha-shaná, or trumpet day. That was the first day of a
New Year; Ten days later the Yom Kippur would come, the day of the purification of sins;
On the 15th, the Sukot party, the joyous autumn harvest party, would take place.

4 The flame that for me had become a representation of the Promised Messiah, went out
the moment I descended to meet the shepherds and the many captives now released.
Full of joy and admiration, everyone wanted to know how such a great liberation had
become possible, only with the use of those torches and horns. I told them then about
the importance of that fire that had been released from the Altar, to free them in that
valley, identifying it as the Savior Messiah.

5 Seeing that everyone carried the dirt of slavery in their bodies and mantles, I invited
them to follow me to the Jordan River, where everyone could bathe, for the purification of
their sins.
6 Only three people attended the invitation: Lot and his two most recent daughters. The
others returned contaminated to their homes.

7 Before leaving, the king of Sodom came to meet me, promising to give me all the
wealth recovered that morning. I rejected his offer, so that someone could never say that
I enriched myself with that plunder.

8 We stayed camped on the banks of the Jordan River, near Jericho for twelve days. In
those days of refreshment, everyone was free of impurities, leaving them in the waters
of the Jordan. This was a special preparation for the Sukot party that we decided to
commemorate in Salem.

9 Full of joy, we started an upward march towards the city of Salem, unaware of the
happy surprise that awaited us. I was still at the front with Lot and his two daughters by
my side, and behind the 300 shepherds came, leading the great flock.

10 As we moved forward, I began to notice that my vase that had become empty at
dawn became very heavy. As I lowered it, I looked surprised to discover within it many
pearls of various sizes and glitters that mysteriously formed.

11 When we see the white city in the distance, we begin to hear sounds of a great party.
Harmonious chords reverberated through the mountains, as we advanced along the
road.

12 My curiosity in knowing that city and its young king was immense, because from the
mouth of many I had already heard about its greatness and fame. It was a kingdom
different from all the others, where subjects were trained not in the handling of bows and
arrows, but in the domain of musical instruments. Melchizedek, his young king, ruled
everyone with a very special scepter: a lute, for which he had paid a high price.

13 As the joy grew in me as we approached the City of the Great King, we saw a crowd
dressed in fine linen, pure and shining, coming out to meet us. They all brought musical
instruments, while singing a victory hymn. In front of the crowd came a young man
playing a lute, bringing a crown full of precious stones on his forehead, which shone
under the clarity of the setting sun. I was certain that this was the acclaimed king of
Salem.

14 At the time of our meeting, we were admired with the salutation they gave us;
Leaning in front of me, Melchizedek said:

15 – “Blessed are you Abraham, servant of the Most High GOD, who possesses the
heavens and the earth; and blessed be the Most High GOD, who delivered your
adversaries into your hands. “-



CHAPTER 6

(Great revelations of Melchizedec and his people. The victors are crowned. Upon being
crowned, Abraham is moved to observe deep wounds in the hands of Melchizedek.
Melchizedek promises to tell his story. Melchizedek, by breaking bread and wine, is
honored. The 144 pearls as tithe. The instructions and prophecies of Melchizedek.)

1 Surprised by the festive reception, we were introduced to the city, where the beauty of
the mansions and gardens caused us much admiration. Everything there was pure and
full of peace.

2 We were received in the royal palace, built on Mount Zion. There, a new surprise
awaited us:

3 The great throne room was all adorned with representations of our victory over
enemies. There was a very long table in the middle of the room, covered by fine linen
towels adorned with gold threads and precious stones. There were 304 crowns on the
table, each bringing the inscription of a winner’s name. In a gesture that surprised us
again, Melchizedek, taking the crowns, began placing them on the head of each of us,
starting with Lot and his daughters. We were all admired by the fact that the king of
Salem knew us individually, and by having those crowns ready long before we were
victors.

4 I watched the joy of my crowned companions, when, taking a crown similar to his, the
king of Salem addressed me with a smile. As I lifted it over my head, I noticed something
that I had not perceived until then: His hands brought deep wound scars. Overcome by a
feeling of gratitude, I fell at his feet and, moved, kissed his kind hands, bathing them
with my tears.

5 When I got up, I asked him the meaning of those scars. With a tender smile, he
promised that he would tell me the whole story of that prosperous kingdom, and how
much it cost him to obtain his peace.

6 After being crowned, Melchizedek made us sit around the great table, and began to
serve us bread and wine; From that moment, we began to honor him as Priest of the
Most High GOD.

7 In a gesture of gratitude, I took the vase full of pearls, and placed it at the king’s feet.
Taking him in his arms, he began to caress him, without attempting to shine the pearls.
Expressing gratitude for that offering, he told me that he would accept the vase and,
that of the pearls, he would only accept tithing.

8 Immediately I began to count the jewels, separating the most beautiful for the king.
There were a total of 1,440 pearls, of which I handed him 144. He carefully put them
away in a little box made of pure gold, on whose lid were beautiful ornaments inlaid with
small precious stones.

9 After receiving the tithe that symbolized the great liberation operated by YAHAWAH in
the plain, Melchizedek called to come to him one of his subjects who was a master in
ornaments and paintings, ordering him to honor the vase with a beautiful engraving that
portrayed the moment in which I offered it.
10 While the jug was painted, Melchizedek began telling me the story of his kingdom,
from its foundation until that moment when we were commemorating the great victory
over the enemies.

11 When I returned the vase, now honored with the most beautiful engraving and
inscriptions that exalted justice, humility and love, the king of Salem ordered me to take
the vase with those pearls with me. For six years I and my pastors should tell everyone
the story of that vase that was victorious because of the flame of the altar. To all those
who, with repentance, accept the salvation represented by their history, we should offer
a pearl. At the end of the six years, the pearls would be over; There would be no chance
of salvation. Then the seventh year would come, in which there would be a time of great
anguish and destruction, when there would only be protection for those who possessed
the pearls. By that occasion, the cities of the plain would be totally destroyed by the fire
of the judgment, and the other towns that did not regret, would be decimated by great
plagues.



CHAPTER 7



(The revelations of Melchizedek continue. Events to be verified in Rosh Hashanah, in Yom
Kippur and in the feast of Sukot. Six years of opportunity. The sanctification of the
Sabbath, a sign of covenant with YAHAWAH. The New Jerusalem revealed at the end of
seventh year The Coming of the Messiah The resurrection of the deceased faithful and
transformation of the victorious living Coronation of the righteous in the Holy City (See
Chrono. 3))

1 On the triumph we had just obtained over numerous armies, Melchizedek, after
repeating to me the words spoken by the Messiah, said a sign that would be important
for those who lived for the occasion of the great liberation of Israel. He affirmed that,
multiplying the 144 pearls of tithing by the number of columns in his palace, he would
find the year that would bring to his consummation the great liberation of Israel. Moved
by curiosity, I immediately began to count the columns; They were 40 marble columns,
adorned with precious stones.

2 Upon returning to the king with the result of the calculations, he began making
predictions about the great events that would take place at the end of that year:

3 —When the fullness of time arrives, all human efforts in search of peace will be
frustrated. At that time, numerous nations will ally themselves against the kingdom of
Salem; There will be a battle like never before, and the whole earth will be punished by
fire; After exhausting them all the resources in their defense, Israel will see, with despair,
countless enemies marching against them, with the purpose of eliminating them. Like
Lot on their night of anguish, they will see their hope die, when, in Rosh Hashanah, the
harmonious chords of a lute, played by a Bedouin from the tribe of Taamireh, must be
heard in the middle of the ruins of Salem; His music will revive faith and hope in a better
world, where nation will not rise against nation; where tears, pain and death will no
longer exist. –

4 After comforting the afflicted with the chords of his lute, the Bedouin will take the vase
with the scrolls of David’s grave, and carry it on his shoulders. On that day, his feet will
be on the Mount of Olives, and, crying out for the liberation of Israel, there will be a
strong earthquake that will crack the Mount in half, emerging from the east to the west a
huge valley. On that day, all the land of Israel will be heavily shaken, ensuing a total
destruction for all enemy armies; There will, however, be salvation for all those who, with
repentance, took refuge under the Eternal’s wings, throwing away the instruments of
violence.

5 All mankind will witness with horror the scenes of the liberation of the children of Israel.
On that day, many peoples and powerful nations will be established next to YAHAWAH of
Armies; Crowds of the diaspora Jews will approach, saying: We will go with you, because
we know that the Eternal is on your side.

6 The Yom Kippur that will follow liberation will be a day of purification of the impurities
of all those who accepted salvation; On that day the blindness of the sons of Jacob will
end, and they will look toward Him whom they pierced, and they will cry bitterly for him
as he cries for an only-begotten son.

7 At the feast of Sukot (crops) the Spirit of GOD will be poured out on all flesh; And it will
happen that, everyone who invokes the name of YAHAWAH will be saved, receiving a
pearl from the vase.

8 In the decorrer of the days of Sukot, rains of blessings will fall on the immense valley,
causing a paradise full of joy and peace to appear in the sight of all the peoples,
throughout the Holy Land.

9 On that day the elect of GOD will understand the words of the book:

10 “Hear me, you, who seek justice, you who seek YAHAWAH. Look to the rock from
which you were dug, to the cave from which you were taken. Look to Abraham, your
father, and to Sarah, the one that you he gave birth, he was alone when I called him, but
I blessed him and multiplied him, YAHAWAH comforted Zion, comforted all his ruins, he
will transform his desert into an Eden and his solitude into a garden, where he will find
joy and joy, Thanksgiving chants and music sounds. “

11 On that day the redeemed will look toward the humble Bedouin who freed Abraham’s
vase from the cave, and will sing with joy:

12 “How beautiful they are, on the mountains, the feet of the messenger who announces
peace, of the one who proclaims good news and announces salvation, of the one who
says to Zion: O your GOD reigns! Because YAHAWAH comforted his people, he redeemed
Jerusalem: YAHAWAH discovered his holy arm in the eyes of all nations, and all the ends
of the earth will see the salvation of our GOD. “
13 For six years, all mankind, illuminated by the greater revelation of YAHAWAH’s love
and justice, will have the opportunity to break with the empire of sin, joining the children
of Israel in their march of purification and restoration of the kingdom of light.

14 Then it will happen that all the survivors of the nations that marched against
Jerusalem will rise, year after year, to prostrate themselves before King YAHAWAH of
Armies, and to celebrate the feast of Sukot. And it will happen that the one among the
families of the earth who does not come up and does not come, will attract against
herself the plague with which YAHAWAH will hurt the nations that do not come up to
celebrate the feast of Sukot.

15 In those years of opportunity, the last treat of mercy will sound throughout the world,
in an attempt for all sinners to repent and unite in an eternal alliance with YAHAWAH,
saying:

16 “Thus says YAHAWAH: Observe the right and practice justice, because my salvation is
ready to come and my justice, to manifest. Blessed is the man who proceeds In this way,
and the son of the man who affirms this, who keeps the Sabbath and do not desecrate
him and he keeps his hand from practicing evil. Don’t tell the foreigner that he gave
himself to YAHAWAH: “Naturally YAHAWAH is going to exclude me from his people,” or
say the eunuch: “There is no’doubt, I do not pass a dry tree “; - Thus says YAHAWAH to
the eunuchs who keep my Saturdays and opt for what is my will, remaining faithful to my
covenant:” I must give them, in my house and within my walls, a monument and a name
more precious than they would have as sons and daughters; I have to give them an
eternal name, which will not be removed. And, as for foreigners who surrender to
YAHAWAH to serve him, yes, to love the name of YAHAWAH and become his servants,
namely, all who refrain from desecrating the Sabbath and who remain faithful to my
covenant, I will bring you to my holy mountain and cover you with joy in my house of
prayer. Their burnt offerings and their sacrifices will be well accepted on my altar. In
effect, my house will be called a house of prayer for all peoples. “

17 In the six years of opportunity, Samael, the great deceiver, in a gesture of despair,
will use all possible resources to prevent the realization of YAHAWAH through His people.
In opposition to the sanctification of the Sabbath which is the sign of the covenant
between YAHAWAH and his chosen ones, numerous religions, allied to impious rulers, will
impose another day for worship, not being able to buy or sell all those who remain
faithful to the covenant of YAHAWAH In those years of trials, the elect of GOD will survive
by caring for the angels, who will lead them away from the populous cities that will be
punished for the last seven plagues that will fall on the unrepentant at the end of the six
years.

18 During the six years of the final harvest, the Messiah will build a New and Eternal
Jerusalem, adorning it with the acts of justice of His elect. That New Jerusalem will only
be revealed when all divine justice is completed, at the end of the seventh year, a period
in which the elect of GOD will have as a challenge to live a life without guilt, since any
act of rebellion at that time would be without atonement, meaning a eternal shame for
the Creator.
19 At the end of the seven years, the Messiah will appear in the clouds of heaven,
accompanied by all the heavenly hosts; By playing His trumpet on that great Rosh
Hashanah, the deceased faithful will rise in glory; the victorious living will be transformed
in the blink of an eye, receiving perfect bodies; Together, all the redeemed will be
raptured into the New Jerusalem, on an unforgettable journey that will begin on the first
day of the Sukot festival; After seven days of happy ascension, they will arrive in the
Holy City to commemorate, before the throne, the eighth day of the party. As if it were a
dream, the rescued of the Lord will enter the Holy City, finding on their north side, the
garden of Eden, in the middle of which Mount Zion rises, the place of YAHAWAH’s throne.
Crowned by the Messiah, the redeemed will sing the song of victory, making the chords
of their harps, lutes and flutes vibrate throughout the space.

CHAPTER 8

(Melchizedek’s predictions continue. Abraham and his shepherds proclaim the salvation
represented by the history of the vase and its redemptive flame. They grant pearls to
believers. A time of opportunity before the calamity. The pearls of the vase did not have
meaning to Sara.)

1 After uttering all these predictions, Melchizedek told me that all the experience we
were living was pre-figurative. For the whole drama to be consummated, we still had
important events ahead of us; First, I should return to the Mamre Oak together with my
shepherds, to proclaim to all the salvation represented by the history of that vase.
Anyone who, with repentance, accepted the revealed Messiah, would obtain forgiveness
of their sins, receiving a pearl. At the end of six years, on the eve of Rosh Hashanah, the
pearls would be finished, there being no more chance of salvation. At that time, the fire
of judgment would fall on the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, with terrible plagues upon
all the infidels.

2 When I heard such words from the king of Salem, great anguish came upon me, when I
remembered Sara’s last steps; I feared that she, in her disbelief, would not accept a
pearl. If this happened, my beautiful dreams would fall to the ground, because I would
not be happy in his absence. Reading in my eyes the anguish, Melchizedek comforted
me with a promise:

3 —Abram, six years from now YAHAWAH will visit you in your store, and your wife will be
cured of her sterility. She will convert and give you a son named Isaac. –

4 At the end of the Sukot party, we return to our stores next to the Mamre Oak. As we
went along the road, many people surrounded us, admired by the beauty of the vase full
of pearls; We all told the story of his redemptive flame, and offered the pearls to all who,
believing, accepted salvation.

5 When we arrived at the Mamre Oak, a crowd of people waited for him; Many had heard
of the miraculous liberation operated through that vase that had been the target of so
much contempt. Now, everyone was muted to see him glorified.
6 Together with my pastors, we continue to proclaim the infinite love of YAHAWAH
revealed by the flame. The number of those who sought pearls was increasing, day after
day, and we were all happy.

7 The days, months and years went by, and the amount of pearls was decreasing inside
the vase. We were living now the last months of the sixth year, which was the last
chance. As the days went by, a worry and anguish increased in my heart, for Sara had
not taken interest in seizing her pearl in spite of my constant pleas.

8 In those moments of affliction in which I cried out to GOD for the salvation of Sarah, my
only consolation was the last words of the king of Salem, that at the end of the six years
she would be transformed.

9 We lived now the last days of the sixth year; The awareness that time was running out,
made many people procure me from morning to night, to seize the pearls of salvation.
With my heart wounded by inexpressible affliction, I insisted with Sara, trying to convince
her of her need to take, as soon as possible, a pearl, because they were becoming
scarcer every day. Regardless of my anguish, Sara disdained my requests, affirming that
those pearls had no meaning for her.



CHAPTER 9

(Abraham tries to convince Sara without success. Abraham receives three pilgrims with
hospitality. The Lord converts Sarah and blesses him, gives him two pearls, one for her
and one for his son. Abraham falls at the feet of his Redeemer and receive the last
pearl.)

1 After a sleepless night in which, desperately, I tried to convince my beloved to take
possession of her pearl, accepting the salvation represented by that vase, I saw the sun
rise bringing the light of the last day — the eve of Rosh Hashanah. – Looking into the
vase that morning, I saw that there were barely three pearls left. When I admired the
brightness, I began to imagine that the brightest would be for my promised son, that of
intermediate brightness would be Sara’s, and the last one would be mine. That thought
brought me relief and hope; But, at the same time, I began to worry about the possibility
of people arriving trying to get them; If they came, I could not deny them the right to
them.

2 Taken by that concern, I sat under the Mamre Oak. During the day, a great shudder
came upon me when I saw in the distance three pilgrims walking towards our shop. I
began to cry out to GOD that they change course, but my cries were not answered.
Dominated by great bitterness, I ran to them, and, after prostrating myself, invited them
into the shadow.

3 Taking a vase with water, I began to wash their feet, cleaning them from the dust of
the road. Seeing the wounded and blistered feet of those men, I felt compassion for
them; I understood that they had come from far away, facing dangers and challenges, in
order to get the pearls on time. I saw that they were much more deserving than me, Sara
and our promised son.

4 By washing the feet of the third, my heart that until then was afflicted, was filled with
peace and joy; I imagined at that time, how terrible it would be if that third pilgrim had
not joined the first two on that journey; In that case I would be obliged to take the last
pearl, climbing without my beloved Salem. If I had to go through that experience, the
pearl that symbolized the joy of salvation, would become for me a symbol of loneliness
and sadness, because the long life of Sara’s affection would be for me the greatest
punishment, like my own death.

5 After washing their feet, I began serving them the food that was specially prepared for
them. While serving them in silence, I was waiting for the moment when they would ask
me about the pearls. But without revealing any hurry, they talked about the long walk
they made, about the cities they had passed through. I asked them if they knew Salem;
They answered me affirmatively, adding that in those six years, many works had been
carried out in that city, in preparation for a great party that was about to take place in
another year, for the occasion of Sukot.

6 The words of that third pilgrim, the most talkative of the three, began to bring me,
mysteriously, a feeling of hope. Looking into his blue eyes, I saw that he looked like
Melchizedek.

7 I remembered the last promise made by the king of Salem, when the third pilgrim
asked me with a smile:

8 —Abram, where is Sara your wife?! –

9 Stunned, I asked him:

10 – How do you know my name and my wife’s name? –

11 The pilgrim replied:

12 “Not only do I know your names, but I also know that, within a year, you will have a
son who will be called Isaac.” –

13 When I heard the words of the visitor, I ran into the store to call my wife, to hear the
words of the pilgrim.

14 When he saw her, the pilgrim asked him:

15 – Sara, why are you laughing at my words? –

16 Scared, Sara replied:

17 – I did not laugh my lord!

18 —Don’t say you didn’t laugh, because I saw you laughing inside the store. – The
pilgrim affirmed.

19 Conscious of being in front of someone who knew his interior, Sara asked him:
20 – Who are you Lord ?!

21 – I am the flame that broke away from the Fire of the Altar to be in your husband’s
vase! I am the Messiah, the YAHAWAH who suffers humiliation and contempt for love of
His people! –

22 Having made this revelation, the pilgrim extended His hands over Sarah’s head to
bless her; Only until then I saw that they were marked by scars similar to those of the
king of Salem.

23 The pilgrim, with much tenderness, began to speak to the heart of my beloved,
rescuing her from her cave of disbelief:

24 – Sara, you are valuable in my eyes! All your past of disbelief and infertility is
forgiven! I have a glorious future for you, for you will become the mother of many
peoples and nations! –

25 After saying these words, the noble visitor went to the vase and, bowing, took from
him the three remaining pearls. Addressing Sara, he handed her two pearls, and said:

26 “One is for you and the other is for your son Isaac. –

27 With life transformed by YAHAWAH’s love, Sara prostrated herself at the feet of the
pilgrim who had saved her at the last moment of opportunity. When I saw her prostrate
submissive, my heart for so many years afflicted, it broke into tears of joy and gratitude,
and I fell at the feet of my Redeemer and King.

28 After comforting us with the certainty of our eternal salvation, the pilgrim handed me
the last pearl. When I squeezed it in my hands I felt a great light of joy and peace
penetrate my whole being, and I began to praise the Eternal for the certainty that I
would forever have my dear Sara and the son of the promise that, within One year would
be born.

CHAPTER 10

(Abraham accompanies the Lord to the hill from where the Lord sends his two
companions on a mission. YAHAWAH laments the destruction that will come to the
inhabitants of the cities of that beautiful valley. Abraham intercedes for that people.
There were not ten righteous in Sodom and Gomorrah. YAHAWAH’s lamentation. The two
companions are sent to rescue Lot and his daughters. Abraham prostrates himself
thankful to YAHAWAH for the intervention in the rescue of his relatives.)

1 After these things, YAHAWAH said goodbye to Sara and the shepherds who were there,
and invited me to accompany them to the hill facing the valley. When we arrived at that
place, the Eternal said goodbye to his two companions, sending them on a special
mission in Sodom.

2 From the top of the mountain we contemplated the fertile valleys and forests that, like
a paradise, stretched on both banks of the Jordan River, surrounding the thriving cities,
within which Sodom and Gomorrah stood out.
3 It was on that hill that, after the fight between my shepherds and the shepherds of Lot,
I gave him the opportunity to choose the course to follow, because we could not stay
together. Attracted by the riches of the countryside, he decided to move there.

4 Looking at my companion who remained silent from the moment we saw the
countryside, I was surprised to see him crying. I asked him the reason for his sadness,
and He, sobbing replied:

5 – This is for me a very sad day, for for the last time my eyes can rest on this fertile
valley. I cry for the inhabitants of those cities who don’t know their days will end! –

6 YAHAWAH’s statement brought back the memory of all those captives who had been
released six years before; unfortunately, almost everyone rejected the purification bath,
returning filthy to their homes; Only Lot and his daughters accepted salvation, taking
possession of their pearls. Thinking about some possibility of liberation for that people, I
asked the Lord:

7 – And if there are in those cities, fifty just people, would they still be destroyed? –

8 YAHAWAH told me that if there were fifty righteous, the entire plain would be forgiven.

9 – What if there are 45 fair? –

10 —If there were 45 righteous, all those cities would be forgiven. –

11 I continued with my inquiries until I reached number ten. YAHAWAH told me that if
there were 10 righteous in those cities, the entire plain would be forgiven.

12 Tortured by an inexpressible agony of spirit, YAHAWAH again wept bitterly, while in a
seized voice he uttered a sad regret:

13 —Sodoma and Gomorrah, how many times I wanted to gather your children, like the
chicken that gathers its chicks under its wings, but you did not accept my protection.
Why is it that you changed the light of my salvation, for the darkness of this kingdom of
death ?! My ears are attentive in search of at least one prayer, but everything is silence!
My hands are extended, ready to prevent the fire of judgment, but you reject my help! –

14 Leaning next to my suffering companion, I joined Him in lamentation. In that moment
of pain, I was certain that Melchizedek also suffered for all those who had changed the
love and peace of Salem, for the illusions of that valley of destruction.

15 After a long cry, YAHAWAH comforted me, with the revelation of his two companions,
they were at that time in Sodom, with the mission of saving Lot and his daughters
freeing them from death. His words brought me great relief, and I fell grateful to his feet.



CHAPTER 11

(YAHAWAH commissioned Abraham to record in a scroll the history of the Vase, as well as
the history of Salem, to later deliver it inside the Vase to Melchizedek. Destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah. Abraham laments in extreme.)
1 Before leaving, YAHAWAH commissioned me with a mission, saying:

2 —Take an empty scroll and record in it the history of the vase and the history of Salem,
as you heard from Melchizedek’s lips. Within a year, you and all those who will accept
salvation must go up to Salem for Sukot’s feast; On that day, they will return the vase to
the king of Salem, offering the scroll inside him as a present. –

3 That same afternoon, in obedience to YAHAWAH’s orders, I began to record the story
lived by me and my shepherds, from the moment I left for the valley, carrying the vase
with its flare on its back.

4 The next day, the sun was already high, when, mentioning the city of Sodom in the
manuscript, I remembered that this was the day of its destruction. With my heart racing,
I ran over there and was frightened by the scenario that stretched before my eyes:
Instead of that fertile valley, similar to a paradise, there was a smoking desert, lifeless;
Instead of the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, there was a deep crater, where the salty
sea waters dripped.

5 Broken at that vision of destruction, I returned to the store with a sad heart. The
memory of so many people who, by rejecting divine forgiveness, had been consumed by
fire, left me deeply weakened. In the following days, I found no strength to write; I
returned to the hill other times, hoping that all this was a nightmare, but instead of the
fertile valley I could only perceive that chaos.

6 It took several days for me to return to the spirit of continuing with the writings of the
scroll.
Salem’s Story

(A story written by Abraham)

Abraham tells Salem’s Story as he heard it “from the lips of Melchizedek” on the
occasion when they went up to Salem to celebrate Sukot’s party, after The Great
Liberation. Adonías, tired of the iniquities of the people and inspired by the virtues of his
beloved son, builds a city: “a kingdom different from all others.” After experiencing the
joy of victory and the lamentation of perdition, Melchizedek receives a revelation from an
angel, in which he declares that “all that drama he was living… had a prefigurative
sense, portraying past and future events, which involved the whole vast universe. “ (See
Chrono. 1 and 2)

CHAPTER 1



(Adonijah, a righteous man, seeks to achieve his dream of justice and peace. He writes
on a scroll the laws that would govern the new kingdom of peace. The building of Salem
begins, which is destined only for the clean of heart.)

1 This is the story of Salem as I heard it from Melchizedek’s lips on the occasion of
Sukot’s party, fifteen days after the release of Lot and his daughters.

2 It all started with a dream in the heart of a man named Adonijah; He possessed many
riches, but he appreciated nothing more than the justice and peace that were born of
wisdom and love.

3 Tired of the injustices that prevailed throughout the land of Canaan, Adonijah decided
to build a kingdom that was governed by laws of love and justice. The name of the
capital of that kingdom would be Salem, the City of Peace.

4 Salem’s subjects would not wield bows and arrows, but would be trained in musical art;
Each inhabitant of Salem would always have at his fingertips a musical instrument, to
express through him the peace and joy of that new kingdom. Together, they would form
a powerful orchestra in the fight against disharmony born of pride and selfishness.

5 The first step of Adonías for the concretization of his plan, was to elaborate the laws of
the new kingdom, which he wrote them in a parchment. Salem’s subjects could not lie,
steal, hate, or kill their fellowmen. Pride and selfishness were indicated as the cause of
all evil, therefore, they could not exist in that place of peace.

6 The laws of parchment required the practice of humility, sincerity, friendship, and,
above all, the love that is the greatest of all virtues.
7 After registering on the parchment the laws that would govern that kingdom, Adonías
began to plan the architecture of Salem. It would be a city at first small, with rooms for
one thousand two hundred people. As the place of its construction, a high region of
Canaan, west of the Mount of Olives, was chosen.

8 In a short time, the realization of Adonías began to attract people from all over the
world who, from near and far, came to know the palaces and mansions that were being
built. Admired by the beauty of that white city, visitors asked about who their inhabitants
would be. Adonijah showed them the scroll, saying that Salem was destined for the clean
of heart — those who were willing to obey his laws. –



CHAPTER 2



(Conclusion of the Salem building. Melchizedek, his father’s inspiration. Adonijah seeking
to honor a special subject, sees in Samael a reflection of the prince’s own virtues.
Samael is honored.)

1 The building of the city was finally completed and Salem proved beautiful as an ornate
bride, waiting for her husband.

2 Seated on his throne, Adonijah now examined the numerous candidates for subjects
who came from everywhere. Those who, promising fidelity to the laws, were approved,
received three gifts from the king: the right to a mansion, fine linen garments and a
musical instrument in which they should practice.

3 The city was finally full of inhabitants. Full of joy, Adonijah summoned everyone to
Salem’s inauguration party, during which he proclaimed a decree that would determine
the future of that kingdom, saying:

4 —From this day, which is the tenth of the seventh month, six years will be counted, in
which all the inhabitants will be tested. Only those who remain loyal, progressing in the
practice of the laws of parchment, will be confirmed as heirs of this kingdom of peace.
Those who are bound by guilt and transgression will be banished by trial. –

5 The king’s words led everyone to a thorough examination of the heart, and they
rejoiced with the certainty that they would achieve victory over all pride and selfishness,
which are the roots of all evil.

6 Adonijah had an only child whom he had given the name of Melchizedek. The beauty,
tenderness and wisdom of that beloved son had been his inspiration for the edification
and foundation of his kingdom.

7 Melchizedek was twelve years old, when Salem was inaugurated. It was the plan of
Adonias to crown him king over the approved subjects, at the end of the six years. This
plan would keep it a secret until the right time.
8 The prince, with his virtues and sympathy, soon became very dear to everyone in
Salem. He always had a smile and a word of affection on his lips. He appreciated being
with the subjects in their homes, reciting the laws of the parchment in the form of
beautiful songs that he lived composing. Its presence brought to the environment an
atmosphere of happiness and peace. That beloved prince possessed, in fact, all the
virtues necessary to be king of a Victorious Salem.

9 Adonijah had built a special mansion next to the palace, with the purpose of offering it
to the subject whose life most perfectly expressed the laws of the parchment. Daily he
watched the inhabitants, searching among them for that person whom he wished to
honor.

10 He was walking through Salem’s malls, when, through the chirping of birds, Adonijah
heard a voice similar to that of his son. Turning to see who he was, he found a beautiful
young man singing a song. When he contemplated on his face the brightness of wisdom
and purity, Adonijah was glad to have found him whom he could honor. That young man,
who was a faithful copy of the prince, was called Samael.

11 Placing a ring on his finger, the king led him to the palace, where he was received by
Melchizedek who offered many presents, including the right to always be by his side.

12 Adonijah prepared a great banquet in honor of Samael, for which all were invited.
When he looked at him next to the king, the subjects cheered him with joy, crediting him
as being the prince himself.

13 They exalted with joy the virtues of that beautiful young man, when Melchizedek
manifested himself, placing himself with a smile to the right of his father.

14 At the banquet, Samael was honored by all. He was really worthy of residing in the
mansion of the mountain, for there was in him a perfect reflection of the virtues that
crowned the beloved prince.



CHAPTER 3

(The sublime compositions of Melchizedek inspired the people to acts of kindness and
peace. Music preserving harmony and peace. Samael, Melchizedek’s inseparable
companion. Important revelations of Adonijah to his people about the future government
of a victorious Salem. Samael, guardian of the laws.)

1 Salem grew in happiness and peace. With joy, the subjects gathered every day at dawn
to hear, sing and play the sublime compositions of Melchizedek, which inspired acts of
kindness and peace.

2 Among friendships born and strengthened by virtue of harmonious music, the one that
united the prince and Samael stood out. Since he had begun to reside in the mountain
mansion, Samael had become his constant companion. Together they spent long hours,
meditating on the laws of parchment. With admiration, the honest subject saw Adonijah’s
son transform those laws into beautiful songs. The sweet melodies were born from his
lips like the perfume of a flower.

3 Aware of the importance of music in the preservation of harmony and peace in Salem,
the prince, in addition to singing, began to devote himself to instrumental music, the lute
being his favorite instrument. It was through that instrument that he was able to express
with greater perfection the richness of his soul.

4 Of the six years of testing, five finally passed. Adonías, happy to see that until then all
the inhabitants of Salem had remained loyal to the principles contained in the
parchment, summoned them to a banquet, in which he would make important
revelations.

5 Having taken their places before the throne, the subjects joyfully joined the voices
singing the songs of peace, being ruled by Samael.

6 After hearing them, the king, excited, addressed his son, hugging him in the midst of
applause from the grateful crowd. Everyone recognized that peace and joy in Salem were
largely due to the love and dedication of the beloved prince, who was the author of those
sweet songs.

7 At that moment of recognition and gratitude, Adonijah revealed his plans kept until
then secret. In a leisurely voice, he told them:

8 – Subjects of this kingdom of peace, my soul is full of joy to contemplate on your day
your faces more radiant than in times past. Your clothes remain white and pure, as when
you received them from my hands. The harmony of your voices and Instruments are
better today.

9 Having said these words, the king added solemnly:

10 —A year of trial still remains, at the end of which you will be examined. Remaining
faithful as here, you will be honored by being confirmed as subjects of this kingdom of
peace. However, if someone were found at fault, they will be banished, even if this trial
brings us much sadness and suffering. –

11 The king’s words led the subjects to deep reflection. Everyone, examining himself,
inquired reverently: - Will we be approved?! –

12 Surely they would be victorious, because they loved Salem and his laws, joined the
voices in an expressive song of faithfulness. At the end of the song, Adonías revealed his
great secret:

13 — Those who are approved, inheriting this kingdom of peace, will receive my son as
king, to whom I will give the glorified throne of this Salem Victorio-sa. –

14 The revelation of the king was acclaimed by all with much joy. Adonijah, however, had
not yet revealed all his plan, so asking for silence, he continued:

15 —My son will hold a special scepter, in which I will seal all the right of dominion, his
scepter, symbolizing all harmony, will be a lute. –
16 Before this revelation that sensitized everyone, the prince prostrating himself at the
feet of his father cried motivated by much joy. Meanwhile, everyone applauded him with
euphoria, yearning to see the dawn of that day when peace would be victorious.

17 Adonijah, calling Samael to be with his son, concluded by saying:

18 – In the government of this victorious Salem, I have the purpose of making Samael
the first after Melchizedek. The parchment of the laws will be entrusted to him, and he
must be the guardian of the honor of this triumphant kingdom. –



CHAPTER 4

(Samael lets himself be dominated by feelings of greatness and pride. He keeps his plan
secret and tries to impose his concepts contrary to the law of parchment. Melchizedek
manages to restore him to the path of humility and righteousness, but again falls to
being dominated by pride and greed.)

1 Samael, knowing Adonijah’s plans for Salem’s future, was filled with euphoria. He was
now gazing at that city like no other, imagining his future of glory. Considering the king’s
words, that he would be the second in the kingdom, he let himself be dominated by a
feeling of exaltation. He, who until then, in obedience to the laws of parchment, had lived
a life of humility, began to take pride in his position. In his winding he felt by the throne,
having Salem’s subjects at his feet, praising his greatness with praise. Samael, totally
dominated by that feeling, did not realize that he was being driven along a dangerous
road. The pride that seduced him was generating the selfishness that would later
manifest in greed.

2 A week after the revelation of Adonijah, the subjects promoted a party in homage to
Melchizedek, the future king of Salem. Seeing him acclaimed for so many praises,
Samael had his heart snatched away by a strange feeling of envy, the result of pride and
selfishness. He could not bear the thought of being left in the background. Wasn’t he as
beautiful and wise as the prince ?! It was almost impossible to disguise such a feeling of
unhappiness.

3 In times past, Samael found indescribable pleasure in the moments when, beside the
prince, he recited the laws contained in the parchment, which were transformed into
beautiful songs. Now, such moments became unpleasant, for those principles
contradicted their ideals. He decided, however, not to reveal his feelings of rebellion. He
would support the old-fashioned parchment until, with his authority, he could exclude it
from the new kingdom that would be established. Wouldn’t he be the guardian of those
laws? That “victory” would seek to achieve through its influence and wisdom.

4 Judging to be able to influence the son of Adonías with his dreams of greatness,
Samael approached him with euphoria, and began to speak to him of the glories of the
coming kingdom, where the two, covered with honors, would enjoy the praises of a
victorious Salem. They would be the heroes of the most perfect kingdom established
among men.
5 The delirious words of the honest subject brought concern and sadness to the young
prince’s heart, for they did not reflect the teachings of love and humility of the
parchment.

6 Seeing his intimate friend in danger, Melchizedek, with a tenderness never revealed,
led him to the side of the throne, where, taking the scroll, he began to read
compassionately the following paragraphs:

7 — Salem’s kingdom will be affirmed on humility, for this virtue is the basis of all true
greatness.

8 Humility is the fruit of love, being contrary to pride, which can keep a creature caught
in dust, making it content with its limitations, deceiving it as if they were of infinite
value.

9 Humility consists in forgetting oneself, and this, in a life of selfless service for others. –

10 Samael, struggling to cover up his indignation at the reading of the scroll that was
outdated for him, said to the prince, in a friend’s advice:

11 —My good friend, we will reign in a victorious Salem, which will shine well above this
scroll, whose principles were faithfully fulfilled in these years of trial. Is not full freedom
not the glory of Salem? Well, know that complete freedom will not coexist with these
laws, whose objective is locked at the end of the five years. It is up to us to crown Salem
with the honor of total freedom, which will generate endless happiness. Such freedom is
impossible to exist under the limitations of the scroll. –

12 The king’s son shuddered a lot at his friend’s words, which showed insanity. How to
free him from that path of death ?!

13 No one in Salem, besides Melchizedek, knew Samael’s sad condition. With patience,
the prince tried to make him aware of the real value of the parchment, whose laws could
never be altered, as this would bring about the end of all peace.

14 The prince’s advice finally awakened his heart. Meditating on his words, he became
aware of being following a deceptive path.

15 Seeing in the eyes of the one who loved the tears of repentance so much, the son of
Adonijah rejoiced in his victory over pride and selfishness.

16 The days that followed the liberation were full of accomplishments; The prince was
even more friendly, willing to give all of himself so that his companion could continue
triumphantly on the path of humility. In those days of jubilation, he was given the honor
of knowing the scepter that was being molded.

17 In a moment of carelessness, Samael, who had once again enjoyed peace in the
spirit, allowed his heart to be possessed again by a feeling of greatness, which triggered
a new storm in his soul. That feeling mixed with pride and greed came upon him when
the prince showed him the golden lute, on which the seal of the entire domain was being
printed.
CHAPTER 5

(Samael formulates plans of conquest. He preaches to the subjects a false and
misleading doctrine. Adonías perceives this rebellion and preaches the accuracy of the
laws of the parchment to achieve peace and true freedom. Melchizedek offers them
forgiveness and the opportunity to turn to righteousness. Samael secretly meets with his
followers and reveals his plan of conquest.)

1 From his mansion Samael watched Salem in his morning glow. Seeing her, which
ornate bride waiting for her king, she coveted her. In his delirium he began to formulate
plans of conquest. He could already feel exalted on his throne, holding the precious
scepter in his hands. Everyone would praise him as the liberator of the oppression of
those laws. Salem would be a kingdom of complete freedom and pleasure. Dominated by
this greed, he began to conquer plans of conquest.

2 Samael decided to act subtly among the subjects, leading them to see on the
parchment some inaccuracy to real freedom. In his deception mission, he would act with
apparent goodness, showing interest in the growth of everyone’s happiness.

3 Putting his plans into practice, he began to visit the subjects in their mansions, telling
them about the glories of the coming kingdom, where they would enjoy complete
freedom.

4 Great was his influence on Salem. Everyone admired his beauty and wisdom, having
him as a perfect apostle of justice and love. No one could imagine that in the midst of
that atmosphere of joy and gratitude a subtle trap was being placed, in the grip of which
many could fall carelessly.

5 In his seductive mission, Samael did not speak against the parchment, however, he
praised him for having exercised a trial mission in those six years ready to end. In his
logic, however, he tried to show that, in the coming kingdom, when all were approved,
they would be above those laws. His arguments, apparently correct, paved the way for
him to openly affirm that, in the new kingdom, the existence of parchment would be an
obstacle to the realization of true freedom.

6 The seeds of rebellion thrown by Samael would soon germinate in the hearts of many
in Salem. This happened six months after Yom Kippur, when everyone’s destiny would be
sealed. A third of the inhabitants, seduced by the terrible deception, now exalted him, in
complete disregard of the laws and the prince, whom they judged as outdated.

7 Adonijah, who suffered when he saw the rise of all this rebellion, summoned the
subjects to an emergency meeting. On the face of all you could see the contrasting
provisions.

8 In a compassionate voice, the king began to reveal to them, as he had never done
before, the great importance of the laws recorded on the parchment, showing that they
were the basis of all prosperity and peace. If such laws were excluded, all happiness and
glory would be extinguished, leading to chaos.

9 After showing the need for the laws, Melchizedek, moved by a strong desire to save
those he loved so much, lifted the scroll in front of everyone and, in a voice full of
goodness, offered them forgiveness and the opportunity to start again on the path of
peace. His words moved everyone, making even Samael himself motivated at first,
however, pride prevented him from repentance again. In this way, the honest subject,
when he could still look regretfully toward the scroll, hardened in his rebellion, deciding
to continue until the end. This decision, however, would not manifest it promptly, for he
had idealized a treacherous plan.

10 At the end of the opportunity meeting, Samael summoned his followers to a secret
meeting, which was held under the blanket of the night, next to the Cedrón Creek that
was outside the walls of Salem.

11 After cursing the parchment and all those who defended it, he began telling them
about his plans for revenge and betrayal:

12 —As you know, the six years of trial are running out, subtracting, as of today, twenty-
four weeks for the day of the coronation. If you would like to have me as king instead of
Melchizedek, I can steal your scepter, taking over the kingdom. –

13 Samael began to explain to them the betrayal launches, giving them the proper
guidance on how to act from that date:

14 — We need to maintain an appearance of fidelity to the parchment and the prince
until it is time to act. The blow will be given on the night before the coronation day. At
midnight, we sneak away from Salem. I will steal the scepter that night and, together, we
will flee to the deep valley where the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah are. There we will
arm ourselves, and march against Salem, subjugating our enemies. We will end then with
the per-gamino and with all those who refuse to pay obedience to our government. –




CHAPTER 6



(Samael and his accomplices pretend fidelity to the kingdom. Confident Melchizedek
shows Samael the secret place of the golden lute. Samael betrays Melchizedek’s
confidence by preparing his men and stealing the precious scepter. Samael and his
followers march towards the valley. Salem is in danger .)
1 Days of apparent tranquility and peace ensued, Samael, feigning fidelity, was always
at the side of the prince, showing admiration for his new compositions that exalted the
laws of parchment. Samael’s followers, in the same way, united the voices in praises that
expressed the greatness of the principles to which they disgusted.

2 Melchizedek, full of joy to see the day of his coronation approaching, rehearsed with
the subjects the songs of victory, which he had composed especially for that occasion.
He happily talked to everyone about his dreams of making Salem increasingly full of
honor for his beauty and harmony.

3 Samael, in his hidden wickedness, mocked the prince. He already foresaw the pain that
would be caused by the betrayal.

4 In those days of apparent peace, the rebel subject sought to know where the scepter
would be hidden until the day of the coronation. The prince, without distrust, revealed all
the secret: the room, the chest with its enigma, the rich case and finally the treasure.
Contemplating the cunning Samael was encouraged to see the seal of the domain
printed on its convex part; He understood that he who possessed it would have Salem’s
kingdom in his hands. Only a few days, he thought, and he would have that precious
instrument under his power.

5 The sun declined bringing Salem the day that would mean victory or defeat.

6 Shortly before nightfall, Samael had left the palace where he had spent the whole day
next to the prince, helping him in the preparations for the coronation ceremony. Heading
towards his mansion, he greeted the darkness with an evil smile. How much he had
longed for that night!

7 While the faithful, bewitched by the excitement of the happy victory, reviewed under
the light of candlesticks the ornaments of their instruments, their garments and
mansions, certifying that they would be approved the next morning, Samael and his
followers made their final preparations To wield the blow.

8 At midnight, following Samael’s instructions, all his followers silently abandoned their
mansions, heading for the deep valley of Cedrón, where they would wait for their new
king.

9 Samael, in turn, went to the palace funds, where he hoped to enter without being
noticed, going to meet the scepter. Avoiding making any noise, he crossed the portal,
silently heading to the room that guarded the beautiful scepter.

10 At that moment, the prince who, sleeplessly rolled in his bed, feeling some danger,
went to his father’s room and woke him up saying:

11 “My father, I heard the sound of footsteps inside the palace. –

12 Stroking the head of his son, Adonijah, sleepy replied:

13 “Son, don’t worry.” Lie with me and sleep peacefully. From here the dawn will scratch
and you will have the golden lute in your hands. –
14 The prince, reassured by the reliable words of his father, gave himself to a dream of
beautiful dreams in which he lived next to Samael and all Salem’s subjects, the festive
moments of the coronation. While this was happening, the rebel with trembling hands
seized the scepter. At that time, he had the idea of taking only the lute, leaving the case
in its proper place. With a smile full of evil, he imagined the moment when the king
would give his son that empty case.

15 Taking the scepter with him, Samael hurried to the place where his followers were
waiting for him. When he found them, he gave way to all his pride by proclaiming:

16 —Now I am the king of Salem. Who owns a scepter like mine? With it I dominate the
land and the sea. My strength is in darkness, because through them I conquered it. –

17 Celebrating the victory, the noisy mob separated to distance themselves from Salem,
following the corrupted cities of the plain, where they pretended to arm themselves for
the conquest of their kingdom.

18 The sun appeared on the horizon, bringing the light of the day of atonement (Yom
Kippur). Waking up from his dream of beautiful dreams, the prince got ready for the
ceremony of judgment and coronation. Special garments of fine linen, adorned with gold
threads and precious stones, were prepared. After dressing, Melchizedek headed to meet
his subjects, at the southern end of Salem. From there he would lead them on a festive
march towards the palace to the north, on Mount Zion.

19 Adonijah, sounding a long horn, summoned everyone to the trial meeting. Leaving
their mansions, all the remaining ones went towards the square of the south door, taking
with them their musical instruments.

20 When he met those faithful, Melchizedek was surprised by the absence of many. That
mystery hurt in his soul, for he hid the most beloved face of his friend Samael.

21 Leaving his followers together, the prince went in search of the absent. In his
unsuccessful search, he finally went to the mansion on the mountain, where he called
Samael; His voice, however, brought no reply beyond an empty echo, which translated
ingratitude.

22 Reading betrayal in the sad emptiness, he felt like crying. In a single moment the
whole past came to mind of the one whom he had sought with such dedication to keep it
in his glory, through wise advice. He remembered those days that followed his recovery;
How he had rejoiced with the certainty that his friend would never fall again! Taking him
to present the tragedy, Samael’s inquiries about the lute came to mind, which he showed
in a gesture of friendship. The memory of this fact, added to the steps heard inside the
palace that night, gave him the certainty that Salem was in danger. Not enduring that
possibility of betrayal, he prostrated himself in tears, hurt by the terrible ingratitude of
the one to whom he had dedicated so much love.

23 Curved by pain, he remained for some time trying to find some comfort. He finally
dried his tears, determined to make any sacrifice in order to return his glory and power
to Salem, redeeming the scepter from the hands of rebellion.
24 Consoled by the certainty of victory, Melchizedek returned to the side of the faithful
subjects. Hiding their suffering, as well as the reason for the absence of so many, the
prince guided them in a triumphant march towards the palace.



CHAPTER 7

(Faithful subjects, oblivious to betrayal, raise songs of triumph in expectation of the
coronation of their king. The coronation is truncated due to the absence of the scepter.
Everyone grieves and Melchizedek comforts them with the promise of rescuing the
precious scepter. Melchizedek goes out in his search Samael, full of anger, scrapes the
inscriptions engraved on the scepter Melchizedek faces dangers in search of the scepter
and is preserved.)

1 As they approached Mount Zion, they climbed the very white steps of the stairs, being
followed by the triumphant crowd. It hurt in his soul the expectation of seeing his
cheerful song die on the lips of the faithful, that morning, due to the betrayal.

2 He was now inside the palace, before the magnificent throne that awaited the young
king. At the base of the throne, the parchment of the laws lay open, in the middle of a
floral arrangement. Next to him you could see the beautiful crown, made of gold and
precious stones, as well as the case of that scepter that symbolized all the harmony of
Salem.

3 The subjects were happy, for they knew they would be found worthy to inherit that
kingdom of peace. They were waiting for the moment of the coronation, when their new
king would rule them from his throne with his precious scepter, in a triumphant chant.

4 Amid the applause of the victorious hosts, Melchizedek turned to his father, who
received him with a warm hug. The moment was truly solemn. The hosts were silenced in
anticipation of the coronation. The case would be open and everyone would witness the
exaltation of the beloved prince.

5 With his heart pounding with joy, Adonijah bent down to the case, opening it carefully;
When finding it empty, the joy of his countenance gave rise to an expression of
inexpressible concern and sadness, for in that scepter the fate of that kingdom of peace
had been sealed.

6 Seeing his father and all the subjects afflicted by the absence of the scepter and so
many friends who should be with them at that time, Melchizedek comforted them with
the promise that he would seek the scepter. Unaware of the risks and dangers that
awaited the prince on his way, the subjects said goodbye to him, watching him leave in
haste.

7 The dawn of that day, which would be that of the coronation, reached the distant
rebels of Salem, en route to the cities of the plain. On that morning, Samael was filled
with fury when he saw that the precious lute was adorned with inscriptions of the laws
contained in the scroll. Taking a pointed stone, he began to damage the scepter,
scraping away all the words of love and justice. His harmonious strings were now in tune
over his wounded convex part, but he was still beautiful, for Salem’s domain lay sealed
on him. Owning it meant being the owner of all power.

8 When he reached the height where the road branched, Samael ordered his followers to
continue towards Gomorrah, while he would go to Sodom, where he would remain for
two days, joining them later.

9 He waited for the night to enter Sodom. When he entered there, he walked through the
narrow streets without being noticed, until he found an isolated house on an elevation.
Making the scepter his weapon, he invaded the house killing his inhabitants while they
slept. He thus took possession of that residence where, alone, he would machine his
plans for the sale of Salem.

10 The evening of that day, which would be the coronation, reached the son of Adonijah
as he walked along the stony path to the valley. His eyes were full of sadness and
anxiety turned to the ground, looking for the traces of the rebels. The memory of the
ingratitude of those whom he loved so much made him cry. His tears, reflecting the last
flashes of that setting sun, resembled drops of blood flowing from a wounded heart. He
cried not because of the dangers that came upon him on that cold night, but because of
the unhappy fate of those who had changed Salem's peace because of the violence of
those cities in the plain.

11 His only consolation was the memory of those who, despite all the temptations, had
remained faithful. They had been promised to return the scepter, and this would be
achieved despite any sacrifice.

12 After a long night of insomnia when the prince was lying on the side of the road, he
streaked the light of a day that would be decisive.

13 As he approached Sodom on that morning, the thought of being so close to the
scepter of his beloved Salem, made him forget all the fatigue, shortening his steps
toward the challenge.

14 When the great gate of the city opened, a fear came upon him, upon hearing frightful
noises of disharmony, which translated the pride, selfishness and greed that dominated
all hearts, making them explode in the orgy of an endless evil .

15 It would be a great risk to expose yourself to the free violence of that city. This
thought made him pause at a step from the portal, where he shuddered, bowed his
forehead in an inexpressible internal struggle. He was tempted to retreat, but struggled
with all his soul forces against that thought of failure.

16 Thinking of Salem’s sad fate, whose dominion was being trampled inside that cruel
Sodom, Melchizedek made a firm decision: as a reckless warrior he would have to move
forward, and certainly even if he had to face the accumulation of all the dangers, he
would continue, until he raised in his victorious hands the beloved scepter.
17 Resolute and hopeful, he went through Sodom’s door, diving into that strange world.
Everything there was the opposite of Salem, beginning with the rough and dirty stones of
his constructions. Sodom was a kingdom of darkness.

18 The contrasting presence of the prince was soon noticed by many who, in tumult
surrounded him. The purity of the character expressed in his great face and the splendor
of his garments filled them with horror, and they retreated as defeated by an invisible
force. Dominated by fury, they began to chase him from a distance, determined to make
him flee. He was thrown stones and mud trying to stain his clothes, but they did not hit
him, meanwhile he advanced in his anxious search. They finally gave up chasing him at
sunset.

CHAPTER 8



(Melchizedek after much affliction finds the precious scepter that was destroyed by
Samael. The prince’s dignified stance before the traitor’s threats. His firm willingness to
redeem the scepter at any cost. Pain and blood as the price of the scepter’s rescue. The
atonement of Melchizedek to redeem the scepter, a likeness of the Atonement of Christ
to redeem mankind.)

1 The son of Adonijah traveled all the streets and alleys in search of the beautiful
scepter, but it was in vain. Seeing the sun decline on the horizon, announcing the arrival
of a dark and cold night, his heart was in great agony. There, in that last alley, almost
defeated by exhaustion and despair, he bowed his forehead, fainting in tears. His lips,
pronounced in the middle of sobs the following words:

2 – Salem, Salem, you can’t perish! Your scepter needs to be redeemed from the grip of
rebellion! But when and where will I find it ?! There are no more forces left in me, and the
hope of redeeming him before night leaves me! –

3 The prince, in his supreme anguish, did not perceive that another groan of pain,
coming from busted strings of a humiliated lute, was heard in that evening.

4 Suddenly, the weak groan penetrated his ears, reviving him with the certainty that the
great moment of redemption had come. Drying her tears, she gathered the last forces
running in the direction of a small house on a hill, where the sound seemed to come
from.

5 As he went to the door between the open, he stopped when he contemplated a
contrasting scene of humiliating slavery: Samael, wrapped in a dirty cloak, punished
Salem’s scepter. Both the young man and the scepter were so disfigured that there was
almost no feature of the lost glory in them. That scepter, however, certainly razed as it
was, was very valuable, for in it lay the seal of Salem’s dominion.

6 The contemplation of the one who had been his best friend and of that idealized
scepter as a symbol of all harmony, in such a tragic condition, deeply moved the prince,
making him cry loudly. Only until then did the rebel subject perceive his unwanted
presence. Shivering, he got up, and, full of anger asked him:

7 – What brought you to Sodom? –

8 Indicating towards the damaged scepter, Melchizedek exclaimed:

9 – Salem’s glory is destroyed !!! –

10 With a laugh, Samael mocked his sadness, saying:

11 —Now I am the king of Salem. You who are faithful to the parchment will become my
slaves. –

12 Without giving importance to Samael’s words of affront, the prince, moved by infinite
anguish, said:

13 —Samael, Salem is hurt by your betrayal. Why did you change your home of justice
and love for this valley of injustice, hate and death ?! Now, if you do not wish to return to
Salem, return the scepter. It was to redeem it that, belittling all the dangers, I descended
into this hostile valley. –

14 Knowing the prince’s purpose, the rebel was filled with rage and clenching his fists he
said:

15 – I hate you Melchizedek! –

16 Having said this, he threw the scepter to the ground, and stomping on it added:

17 —I have the desire to do the same with you. –

18 In front of that affront, the prince felt no fear, but compassion. Transporting himself to
the happy past, he remembered the happy moments in which he always had Samael by
his side; He was a pure and humble young man of heart; Why had he allowed himself to
be enslaved by the illusion of pride and selfishness ?! How painful it was to see that
young man who, for his beauty and sympathy, had been honored above all subjects, now
ruined by greed! Had it not been the prince’s dream to have, beside his glorified throne,
the one he considered the most precious friend ?! This tragedy hurt his soul. However,
the sad condition of the scepter afflicted him even more, for this had been made as the
symbol of all harmony, and was being destroyed under the feet of ingratitude.

19 Surprised not to see in Melchizedek’s eyes any expression of fear, but of mercy,
Samael felt frustrated in his insults that aimed to intimidate him, leading him to give up
his mission.

20 Before the dignified position of the prince, who contemplated him in silent pain, he
felt ashamed. That weakness, however, was banished by the pride that dominated his
heart. Then he began to plan something terrible, to humiliate and hurt the prince,
making him suffer even more. With derision he said:

21 — Salem’s scepter may be yours, if you manage to pay me the price of your ransom.
–
22 With a gleam in his eyes, the prince asked him:

23 – What is the price? –

24 Samael, with a mischievous smile, slowly replied:

25 – The price is not gold or silver, but pain and blood. You must undress completely of
your clothes, lying on the floor. You must endure in that condition, blows, until the sun
sets. If you were willing to submit to me, without reacting, the scepter will be entirely
yours. –

26 Shivering at such a cruel proposal, the son of Adonijah looked toward the sun that lay
distant on a cloud. He then began to lock an intense fight in his heart. At first, the horror
of the sacrifice almost dominated him, encouraging him to retire, but the thought of
seeing Salem enslaved by rebellion, finally led him to the decision to pay the ransom
price, surrendering himself to humiliating suffering.

27 Having made the firm decision to rescue the scepter, the prince threw the clothes,
placing them on a stone. He lay down immediately on that cold floor, his forehead turned
toward the west.

28 Mercilessly, Samael began to scourge him, using the scepter itself as an instrument of
torture. Moaning at the pain of the blows that made him bleed, the prince kept his eyes
fixed on the sun that seemed to stop over the cloud. Stunned by the pain, he finally
watched the sun soon set. Encouraged by the approaching victory, he muttered in a low
voice:

29 “Jerusalem, Salem, from here I will have in your arms a precious scepter that, in my
hands, will become an instrument of justice and peace. –

30 Hearing the promise the prince made between groans, Samael shouted at him
furiously:

31 —Your suffering will not bring any dawn to Salem, for your hands will never be able to
touch in the scepter. –

32 After making that affront, Samael took possession of a pointed stone, preparing to
deal the last blows.

33 While thinking of Salem’s happy victory, Melchizedek felt his right arm being
compressed by Samael’s feet. Following this rude gesture a blow that made him contort
in agony. His hand had been cruelly dug, beginning to pour abundant blood from the
open wound. That same violence was later unloaded on his left hand.

34 Not enduring the agony caused by those heartbreaking blows, the son of Adonijah,
bloodied, plunged into the darkness of a deep fainting



CHAPTER 9
(Samael, horrified by his guilt, leaves the prince leaving the scepter next to him.
Melchizedek regains consciousness, takes his clothes and his scepter, takes an oath and
leaves for Salem. Samael does not regret. The similarity of the experiences of
Melchizedek with whom the Son of GOD would live. Melchizedek is received with
acclamations for his redemptive act, is attended by his loving father and the scepter is
restored.)

1 When he stopped beating the prince, the rebel subject was possessed by a strange
horror when he contemplated on the face of the one who had only done him good, the
drowsiness of death. He tried not to remember the past, but, irresistibly, he felt himself
being dragged into the days of his happy innocence in Salem. Clothed in rich robes, he
was always next to the prince who, with dedication, taught him his songs every day
about peace.

2 In the unwanted memories by which he was dragged, he revived his first steps on the
path of pride and selfishness. He remembered the incessant advice and pleas of the one
who had been his best friend, to give up that path that could lead him to unhappiness.

3 After being dragged in memories by all that past of happiness destroyed by his fault,
Samael was aware of his ingratitude. Horrified by what he had done, he leaned over
Melchizedek’s bloody body, and despaired when he saw him lifeless. Not bearing the
burden of great guilt, he left that place hurriedly, wishing to hide away, under the
darkness of the cold night.

4 After a deep fainting, the prince began to regain consciousness; In delusions that
transported him to the heart of his beloved Salem, he relived lived and dreamed
moments: With joy he contemplated the face of his best friend, to whom he extended his
hand with a smile. But his gesture was frustrated by deep pain. Amid the applause of the
victorious subjects, he received the scepter from his father, but when he touched it, he
felt an irresistible pain in his hands.

5 With these dreams frustrated by pain, Melchizedek awoke to reality. He was naked,
hurt and lonely, in a dangerous place, away from Salem’s coat and affection. More
painful was to think that all that had been the retribution of someone who had been the
main target of all the gifts of his love.

6 The prince, unable to move, considering the great betrayal began to cry without
comfort. He regretted not for his pain, but for the downfall of those who had changed
Salem’s love and justice for the contempt and hatred that would finally reduce them to
ashes over that damned valley.

7 Through the tears, the prince watched the sky that, like a cloak inked with blood,
stretched in the light of the setting sun. He remembered then the lute for which he had
paid such a high price. Where would he be?

8 In his desperate escape, Samael had left the scepter abandoned next to Melchizedek’s
wounded body. When he saw it, he forgot all the pain, and hugged him with his wounded
hands. Stroking the ruined convex part, with a smile he said:
9 —You are mine again. “I bought you with my blood.”

10 Samael who, dominated by the strange horror, had fled after committing the horrible
crime, stopped a step away from Sodom’s door. There, driven by pride, he repented with
indignation at his weakness. Why had he fled after winning such a great victory? Wasn’t
his plan to destroy the kingdom of Salem, to establish his own kingdom? Remembering
the scepter, he decided to return to take it. Why had he left him abandoned next to the
corpse of that hated prince?

11 Gathering his few forces, Melchizedek went dumbfounded to the place where he had
left his clothes.

12 After dressing, having the beloved scepter by the chest, the son of Adonijah, with
deep emotion, made an oath before leaving that place of his suffering. Stroking the
scepter he said:

13 —My beloved scepter, you were created as an emblem of harmony that comes from
justice and love. All the glory of Salem rested upon you when the rebellion in his
ingratitude enslaved you, dragging you into this hostile valley. Here you were hurt and
humiliated, becoming an instrument of impiety in the hands of the tyrant. I, however,
redeemed you with my blood. Now our wounds will be restored, and soon we will be
enthroned amid the praises of a victorious Salem. When this dream comes true, we will
witness together the end of those who rose against us to hurt us. Samael and his
followers will be devoured by the fire that will reduce Sodom and Gomorrah to ashes. –

14 Concluding his solemn oath, the young prince, already hidden by the darkness of the
night, left that hill, and on it the marks of his suffering.

15 Since the king’s son had left, promising to return with the scepter, Salem lived
moments of unspeakable anxiety. In tears, the king and the remaining subjects
remembered all that happy past broken by the ingratitude of the rebels. What tortured
them most was the absence of the prince and the scepter, without which all the
brightness of that kingdom of peace would be obfuscated.

16 Desiring to comfort the hearts of his subjects, Melchizedek advanced in the middle of
the night towards the mountains that surrounded Salem. Still weakened and injured, he
continued on his upward march, hoping to reach his homeland in the morning.

17 That long dark night was finally overcome by the rays of dawn. In Salem, the hope of
seeing Melchizedek again with his scepter was almost abandoned when, looking at the
Mount of Olives, they saw him descending down the road to Gethsemane. When they
found him in the deep valley of Cedrón, they were frightened with his appearance: his
face was pale and his mantle soaked in blood. Precisely still, he smiled expressing great
joy.

18 When they asked him about the reason for those blood marks, Melchizedek took out
his wounded hands from under his mantle, showing them in their midst the redeemed
scepter.
19 After telling them the steps that led him to the rescue of the scepter, the muted
subjects bowed reverently at his feet, acclaiming him as their redeemer and king.

20 In the midst of the praises of the redeemed hosts, the prince was introduced into the
royal palace, where under the care of his loving father, he should recover from his
suffering. The disfigured scepter, now more precious, would also be restored, having to
become even more beautiful than before.

21 The coronation day was set for the next Yom Kippur. On that day, Melchizedek would
seal with the restored scepter the triumph of all the faithful, as well as the condemnation
of the rebels.



CHAPTER10



(Samael, not finding the prince’s body or the scepter, leaves for Gomorrah and is
received as king by his men. Samael and his followers increase in iniquity and pride.
Through terror it conspires the kings of the plain and incites the war against other kings.
Samael and his men are defeated and hide in caves.)

1 A few moments after Melchizedek’s departure, Samael arrived at the place where he
had apparently left him lifeless, next to the lute. Without understanding that mysterious
disappearance, he went on to Gomorrah, where his followers were waiting for him. When
he saw them, he proclaimed his “victory” over the hated prince and over the scepter,
whom he had massacred in Sodom, not subtracting any hope from the followers of the
parchment.

2 His words pleased the rebel mob, who began to commemorate the “conquest” by
giving himself to the orgy. They were mocking justice and love now, exalting Samael as a
victorious king.

3 Now they would obtain weapons, with the purpose of advancing on Salem, settling the
last blow; They joined them in their evil purposes, many criminals who were received as
masters in the handling of bows and arrows.

4 In his madness, Samael ordered the expulsion of every calendar, since in his kingdom
of “freedom” they would not be subject to any computation of time. The laws of morality
were also excluded, resulting in complete chaos. This disorder manifested itself more
clearly in the raucous and cacophonic noise, which they proclaimed as the new music.

5 Dominated by selfishness, Samael and his followers fed on illusions, unaware that their
days were numbered. The fruits of rebellion would soon attract the fire of destruction
upon them.

6 By dividing his followers into small groups, Samael began to command them in violent
acts that terrified the inhabitants of the plains; At that time, they hid in the caverns
located near the salt sea.
7 The respect and fear of the Samael guerrillas, finally led the kings of four cities to
procure it, proposing peace alliances. They were: Bara, king of Sodom, Bersa, king of
Gomorrah, Senaab, king of Adama, Semeber, king of Seboim and Segor, the king of Bela.
At that time, these kings paid tribute to Cordolaomor, the king of Elam who,
accompanied by the armies of four other cities, had subjugated them in the Sidim Valley
by the salt sea.

8 Strengthened by alliances, Samael became more daring in his clothes, bringing terror
and destruction to the territories of distant cities. Cordolaomor’s armies and their allies
who in those days returned from other conquests, enraged by Samael’s provocations,
marched against the four kings, defeating them again in the Sidim Valley. It was on that
occasion that they took captives to the inhabitants of Sodom, among which was my
nephew Lot.

9 Cowed before the fury of the five kings, Samael and his followers hid in their caves,
north of the salt sea.



CHAPTER11



(Samael makes preparations to conquer Salem and exposes his spy plan. On his way to
Salem, his memories torture him. Salem more beautiful and beautiful than before. Events
on the day of the coronation.)

1 The twelve months from the great sacrifice were almost over. The scepter, fully
restored, shone in its case, while the prince, equally restored from the wounds caused by
the rebellion, was glad to see the Yom Kippur coming from his coronation. Meanwhile, he
composed beautiful songs that expressed his love for Salem.

2 In those twelve months, the city of peace became more beautiful, being adorned as a
bride for the great day of the coronation.

3 A week to Yom Kippur, Samael, totally unaware that the day of his trial was
approaching, gathered his followers, announcing that the next mission would be the
conquest of Salem. Before they advanced, however, he would climb only to check the
vulnerable points of the city.

4 After being applauded by the mob, Samael set out on his reconnaissance mission.
While he was advancing alone, he tried not to remember those moments that brought
him terror by guilt, but, dominated by a superior force, he was dragged in his memories
to that mountain of cruel torture.

5 His whole past began to come to mind, like a crumbling weight.

6 When he woke up from his memories from which he failed to flee, it was already night.
The darkness that surrounded him seemed the omen of a sad ending. That
discouragement, nevertheless, tried to discard it with the memory of the army that was
waiting for him, ready to fulfill his orders, in the conquest of Salem, where there would
be no more memories of that parchment.

7 Dawn reached him being close to Salem. When he saw the Mount of Olives, the
memory of the last time he crossed it came, leaving behind the defeated city. How many
nights had passed since then? He had lost track of time, not knowing that exactly twelve
months had passed. He could not imagine that Yom Kippur was on that morning, the day
of his trial.

8 Upon reaching the summit of the Mount of Olives that morning, Samael was surprised
to see that the city had become prettier than before; All of it was adorned with bouquets
and flowers, like a maiden waiting for her boyfriend. And yet Salem was abandoned,
having no sign of life in all its mansions. This led him to conclude that the blows that had
annihilated the prince and the scepter had resulted in all that abandonment. He did not
know, however, that at that time all the remnants of that kingdom were hidden in the
great hall of the palace, waiting for the most glorious moment, of the coronation of
Melchizedek.

9 Imaging himself exalted on the abandoned throne, having victorious armies at his feet,
the rebel entered the city, hurrying to the palace. When crossing the main portal that
gives entry to the main hall, he was filled with astonishment to see a crowd of faithful
gathered there. On a gold table, adorned with flowers carved in precious stones, was the
empty throne. At the base of the throne was the parchment of laws, a gold crown full of
precious stones and the case he had left empty on that night of betrayal. Without
understanding the puzzle, Samael hid behind a column, fearing to be recognized, and
kept watching.

10 The subjects, with the expression of happy expectation, looked towards the empty
throne. Where did they find reasons for all that joy, if they had lost their king along with
the scepter? Samael wondered about that mystery, when Adonijah, applauded by the
subjects, headed for the throne. With a voice full of excitement for the victory, the
founder of Salem announced that the dream of the coronation had arrived. A shout of
triumph echoed through the air when, announced by his father, the beloved prince
entered, heading for the throne. Seeing him covered by a mantle of glory, Samael was
possessed by a terrible dread, and attempted to flee. He discovered, however, that all
the portals of the great hall were closed on the outside.

11 The coronation ceremony began. It was a truly solemn moment. Adonijah, in a
reverent gesture, took the rich crown, placing it on his son’s forehead. After leaning
toward the case, he opened it carefully, taking out the restored lute, whose beauty and
brightness were far superior to his first condition, as his waterhouse left Adonijah’s
hands. Sitting on the throne amid the acclamations of the subjects, Melchizedek began
to play the scepter, drawing chords of great harmony and peace from him. Everyone
quieted down to hear his new compositions expressing his deep love for the scepter and
for all that kingdom of peace.
12 Great emotion invaded everyone’s heart at that moment, bringing them to tears.
Samael, without the strength to react, felt tortured by those chords that tortured him by
reliving his lost opportunities in his mind, in a terrible torture for his conscience.

13 Melchizedek had composed for that special moment, songs that portrayed the
highlights of Salem’s history; When he began to sing about the friendship he had for
Samael, his voice was filled with tears that he could not contain. It was sad for him to
sing about the fall of the one who had been his greatest friend! He sang then about the
high price he had to pay for the reconquest of the scepter, which represents the honor of
Salem.

14 When contemplating those hands marked by the scars, touching with such mastery
and affection the restored scepter, the subjects taken by a strong emotion, prostrated
themselves in tears.

15 Seeing in the hands of Melchizedek that lute that, in his hands had been an
instrument of torture, Samael understood, too late how much he had erred, deviating
from the prince’s advice; How many times those hands on which he had discharged all
that violence had been extended in an effort to save him, and he had neglected them
negligently. Now, it was too late! Extremely late !!!



CHAPTER 12



(Jubilee proclamation and coronation of Melchizedek. Sealing citizenship to the faithful.
Samael introduces himself and challenges the king. Sealing the trial against Samael and
his followers.)

1 The triumphant subjects who, reverent, had been led to all that past of happiness,
betrayal, pain and triumph, finally joined the voices in a joyful proclamation:

2 True and righteous are your principles, oh king of Salem. You are worthy to reign in
glory and majesty among the lords of your faithful, because in your sacrifice you freed us
from the threats of darkness, making the joy of dawn reborn in our hearts.

3 That song of exaltation was followed by the ceremony of the confirmation of all the
faithful in their victory. The son of Adonijah, with his redeemed scepter, began to seal
with a special touch of the scepter, the victory of each one. For which a long line of
exalted faithful was formed.

4 Confirmed subjects, as they received the king’s touch of approval, were placed on the
right side of the throne, where they remained waiting for the confirmation of the others.

5 The glances that, illuminated with joy, had accompanied the sealing of the last
righteous, fell on the strange figure of Samael who, dominated by an irresistible force,
was headed downcast in the direction of the throne. His appearance was horrible: his
countenance had been deformed by evil; their clothes were dirty and smelly; everything
about him disgusted, to the point that no one recognized him.

6 Amidst the astonishment of the subjects, Melchizedek rose from his throne as wounded
by great pain; From his lips the subjects heard a painful exclamation:

7 – Samael, Samael !!! –

8 The deplorable figure of the one who had been so beautiful filled everyone with
sadness, and they began to cry. They lamented because they knew that the fate of
Samael and all those who had followed him could have been very different, if they had
attended to the loving pleas of Adonijah and his son. Was it not the king’s plan and
Melchizedek’s dream to have him as the protector of parchment, being the second in
honor in that kingdom?

9 Samael who, recognizing his misfortune, had approached his head down to the throne,
witnessing all that lamentation, and again deceived by pride, judging that it was a
demonstration of weakness of his enemies. When he remembered his fortified army
waiting for him on the plain, he cheated on him with the certainty that he would be
victorious over Salem. With this thought, he raised his forehead marked by hatred and,
looking at the king, raised his clenched fist and challenged him, disregarding his
authority, with the threat of taking his throne away.

10 Even when forgiven for their downfall, Salem’s subjects did not endure the bold
affront of the maddening young man who, after causing so much suffering, was still able
to get up with such a great challenge.

11 The victorious king who with such pleasure had sealed the conquest of the faithful
with his scepter, raised it painfully for the sealing of the sad fate of the rebels.
Immobilized by a strange force, Samael, without diverting his eyes from the scepter,
heard the proclamation of his judgment and all his followers from the king’s lips:

12 Prisoners of an invisible force would be held in their caverns for six years, after which
they were visited by the fire of the trial that would destroy them together with the cities
that allied with them.



CHAPTER 13



(An angel appears to Melchizedek in his dreams, instructs him and shows him in vision
the Celestial Salem. Melchizedek, the protector of the broadest revelations of GOD.
Salem’s story, a similarity to the history of the Universe. Melchizedek it moves and
honors the Messiah, discovering that it became a likeness of Him. Battle for the disputed
scepter. Judgment Day.)
1 When going to bed after that day of so many emotions, the young king, immersed in
the memories of that past of happiness and pain, rolled in his bed without sleep. When
he finally fell asleep, he had a very significant dream.

2 In the dream, a luminous angel appeared to him, who greeted him with a smile, told
him that the entire Universe accompanied with attention all that drama he was living,
which had a pre-figurative sense, portraying past and future events, which involved The
whole vast universe.

3 The words of the angel awoke in Melchizedek a great desire to know the history of that
cosmic drama.

4 Knowing his living desire, the angel snatched him in the dream, revealing a distant
future. In front of his eyes the glories of a new and splendid Salem were manifested,
whose walls and mansions were made of precious stones; The portals of the city were
made of pearls. Its wide avenues were of pure gold. The city was quadrangular and
stretched for hundreds of kilometers. It was divided into two distinct sectors: North and
South. To the south stood countless mansions, eternal rooms of angels and redeemed
human beings; To the north there was a beautiful paradise which the angel revealed to
be the garden of Eden. There, on both sides of the river of life, there were fields full of all
kinds of vegetation, with flowers and fruits in abundance. They lived there in perfect
harmony, all species of insects, birds and animals.

5 In the middle of paradise you could see a bright mountain, which the angel claimed to
be Mount Zion, the place of GOD’s throne. It was from that mountain that emanated the
river of life, flowing throughout the city.

6 When they had reached the summit of the sacred mountain, the king of Salem was
dazzled by the scenery seen around him. It was in the highest part of Zion the most
beautiful of all the buildings revealed by the angel as the palace of GOD. That
magnificent construction was supported by seven columns, all of transparent gold,
embedded with beautiful pearls. Around the palace, the most exuberant vegetation
flourished: there were pine, cypress, olive, dead, rosemary and fig trees, doubling the
weight of their ripe figs.

7 While admiring the beauty of that place, the angel told him that no human being had
been given the privilege of seeing inside that palace of GOD. He would be given this
honor, as he was chosen to be the bearer of the broadest revelations about the kingdom
of light.

8 When they revered with reverence one of the pearl portals, they prostrated themselves
in adoration, while they heard the song of a multiplicity of seraphim, which circled the
throne, in constant praise to the One Who Was, That Is and That Will Always Be.

9 Looking at the One who was sitting on the throne, Melchizedek was surprised to
discover the figure of a man. He was covered by a mantle of fine linen, of an unparalleled
whiteness, and had on his head a crown formed by seven overlapping crowns, full of
precious stones.
10 Looking at the hands that held the scepter, the son of Adonijah was surprised to
discover in them scars of wounds, similar to those on his hands. The angel claimed to be
the Messiah, the visible manifestation of YAHAWAH, the invisible GOD.

11 Attracted by the shining scepter, with which the Messiah ruled over the entire
Universe, the king of Salem saw in him the seal of dominion, and in it the name was
written: Israel.

12 Struck by a deep emotion, Melchizedek prostrated himself before the King of that
eternal Salem, and, reliving the history of his small town there, he had the desire to know
the great drama of universal history. Knowing the desire of his heart, the angel said:

13 —Now I will tell you the story of this glorious Salem. Everything that will be shown to
you in the vision, you must faithfully record in six scrolls that will be sewn to each other,
forming a single scroll. You will have six years to write them. At the end of the seven
years, you will receive from the hands of an old man a vase containing a special scroll,
with many important revelations, highlighting Salem’s story. You will take that roll, and
sew it as the first of the seven, forming a single roll. After sealing it, you and the old man
will keep it in the vase, taking it to a cave that I will show you north of the salty sea,
where it will remain forgotten until the last days arrive, when it will be rescued and
revealed to the world through a small Bedouin. –

14 After telling the king of Salem these words, the angel led him in vision to an infinite
past, when the Universe did not yet exist.

15 A story very similar to Salem’s began to unfold before his eyes; but, in an infinitely
larger dimension, beginning with the creation of the kingdom of light. With admiration he
contemplated the formation of billions of worlds and stars, full of life and happiness that
began to revolve around the Celestial Salem, the paradise of GOD.

16 His attention then turned to the most beautiful of all the cherubs who, honored by the
Creator, began to dwell with Him in His palace. An age of happiness and peace seemed
to enchant that kingdom, when the same experience of selfishness and rebellion lived by
Samael began to be repeated in the life of that beloved angel.

17 Scenes from a great rebellion began to be shown to Melchizedek, involving all the
inhabitants of the Universe. The honest cherub, similar to Samael, had seduced a third of
the hosts who began to revere him as king.

18 Amid the scenes of that great conflict, the king of Salem witnessed the creation of
planet Earth, upon which man emerged as the rational scepter of that disputed kingdom.

19 In agony he saw the moment when the head of the rebellion approached paradise
subtly, seizing the human being, after seducing him with temptations. Then he heard his
bellow, In a proclamation of victory. From that moment, the enemy of GOD began to ruin
the human being, extinguishing in him all the features of divine glory, as Samael had
done with the scepter.
20 His own experience, when he declared that morning to Salem’s subjects his decision
to go in search of the lost scepter, began to repeat itself before His eyes.

21 Gathering the hosts who had remained faithful to His government, the Creator began
to reveal a rescue plan: He would go in search of man, and would redeem him, even if it
cost him an infinite sacrifice. In front of this revelation, the son of Adonías was moved
prostrate, when discovering that in his life he had been honored to portray Messiah
himself.

22 All the drama lived by the son of Adonijah in his anguishing search, until the moment
of his ordeal for the redemption of the scepter, was gaining amplitudes in that vision that
covered an entire eternity. In front of his eyes paraded scenes of a great battle that,
without truce, would extend until the day of the final judgment, when the victorious
Messiah will wield the redeemed scepter, sealing with him the condemnation of all rebel
hosts.



CHAPTER 14



(Melchizedek had knowledge of the Great Liberation due to the revelations that were
manifested to him by the angel of the Lord. Abraham, Sara, Isaac, Lot and their two
daughters, as well as the shepherds and faithful, are welcomed with joy in Salem, to
celebrate The Feast of Sukot Abraham delivers the scroll to Melchizedek, and he sews it
by joining it to his own.After reading part of Abraham’s scroll, Melchizedek blesses little
Isaac and prophesies concerning the future of the scroll.)

1 Through the revelations received from the angel, Melchizedek became aware of the
great liberation reached ten days before his coronation, in Rosh Hashanah, when in front
of three hundred shepherds with their vases lit, armies of five kings had fallen, freeing
the captives .

2 Knowing our intention to go up to Salem for the occasion of Sukot, the king made
preparations for a great party, in which we would commemorate together the victory
over all the disharmony generated by pride and selfishness.

3 It was for this reason that when we arrived in Salem, we were surprised with all that
honorable reception.

4 To deal with the story of all these events, made me go through this whole seventh
year, almost without noticing his days, which passed quickly. We are today at the gates
of a new Rosh Hashanah, when the 300 shepherds will play the horns, summoning all
those who possess the pearls, for the solemn meeting of Yom Kippur. Five days later we
will be received in Salem for the Sukot party.

5 The certainty that important events should still be reported until the moment when the
vase will be left in the cave, makes me reserve a space in the roll, in which I will record,
day after day, the facts, until the consummation of this history.
6 Today is Rosh Hashanah, the happiest day of my life, for my arms can finally embrace
the son of promise. The first thing Sara did when she received it, was to place in her right
hand the second pearl that the Messiah had given her on the day of her conversion, on
which was written the name Isaac which means “laughter”, the name of Melchizedek and
The name of Salem.

7 Two days before Yom Kippur, Isaac was circumcised, according to YAHAWAH’s order.

8 Since the shepherds began to play their horns in Rosh Hashanah, all those who
possessed pearls from the vase, left their tents, heading in small groups, to be next to
the Mamre Oak.

9 When Yom Kippur arrived, on the day of the solemn meeting, my pastors informed me
that all those who had received pearls had appeared at the meeting, not missing any
person. It was wonderful to see the joy stamped on the face of all that crowd, who
longed for the climb to Salem. Everyone had a story to tell, how they were
misunderstood and humiliated by those who did not receive the salvation represented by
pearls. The only consolation they had at that time, came from the certainty that they
would go up to Salem for Sukot’s party.

10 On the first day of Sukot’s feast, the crowd was subdivided into small groups of twelve
people, to get in order to Salem.

11 Having the vase with the scroll on my back, I placed myself in front of the crowd,
being followed by Sara and Isaac, who were riding a camel; Then behind were Lot and his
daughters; and a little further back, the three hundred pastors followed by all the
faithful.

12 We began our ascent when, accompanied by all his subjects, Melchizedek appeared
coming to meet us, making the festive sound of many musical instruments vibrate
through the air, commemorating the great victory.

13 After greeting us, the son of Adonijah led us on a festive march until he introduced us
to the gates of Salem, which was now more beautiful than before.

14 Before the throne, all the redeemed were crowned by Melchizedek, immediately
beginning the great banquet.

15 Great was the joy of the king of Salem when I handed him the vase with my
manuscript. Taking me to a special room in the palace, he showed me the six
manuscripts in which he had recorded the history of the Universe, as he had been shown
in his dream.

16 Upon receiving my manuscript, he sewed it to others, becoming the first of the great
scroll.

17 On the last day of Sukot’s feast, the scroll was opened in front of the entire crowd of
faithful. After reading a good part of my manuscript, the son of Adonijah, taking in his
arms the little Isaac, said:
18 — In the offspring of this child, all the things written in this manuscript must be
fulfilled. –

19 Having said this, the king blessed him, returning him to Sarah.

20 After blessing Isaac, Melchizedek began talking about the future of the scroll that
would remain for almost four millennia hidden in a cave, being finally found by a Bedouin
from the Taamireh tribe. Upon leaving his cave, the scroll would face the opposition of
many scholars who would declare him apocryphal. The time would come, however, when
his revelations would be confirmed, and many would be transformed by his messages,
preparing for the day of the final judgment.




The HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSE

(A story written by Melchizedek)

Revelations that an angel of the Lord manifested to Melchizedek in a dream that took
place the night after his coronation, a year after recovering the scepter of Salem, having
paid the price of his rescue with pain and blood.



CHAPTER 1



(The Eternal lived an eternity before creating the Universe. World of Light. Mount Zion.
River of life. Garden of Eden. Jerusalem, the city of peace. Lucifer, the firstborn of angels.
Laws of divine government. Freedom of choose Angels, ministers of the kingdom of light
Universe Abyss of darkness, test of faithfulness Separation between light and darkness.)

1 Before there was a star to shine, before there were angels to sing, there was already a
heaven, the home of the Eternal, the only GOD. Perfect in wisdom, love and glory, the
Eternal lived an eternity, before realizing His beautiful dream, in the creation of the
Universe.
2 The countless beings that make up the creation were all idealized with love. From the
tiny atom to the gigantic galaxies, everything deserved His supreme attention. Lover of
music, GOD idealized the Universe as a great orchestra that, under His regency, should
vibrate harmonious chords of justice and peace. For each creature He composed a love
song.

3 The Eternal was very happy, for His dreams were about to come true. Moving with
majesty, he began His work of creation. His hands first shaped a world of light, and on
him a glowing mountain on which the throne of the Universe would be forever affirmed.

4 To the sacred mountain GOD called: Zion. From the base of the throne, the Eternal
brought forth a crystalline river, to represent the life that would flow from Him to all
creatures. As a throne room, he created a beautiful paradise that stretched for hundreds
of kilometers around Mount Zion. To paradise he called: Eden. To the south of paradise,
on both banks of the river of life, numerous mansions adorned with precious stones were
built, destined for the angels, the ministers of the kingdom of light.

5 Surrounding Eden and the angelic mansions, GOD built a wall of bright jasper, along
which large pearl portals could be seen. With joy, the Eternal contemplated the Dream
Capital. The city in its splendor was like an ornate bride, ready to receive her husband.

6 Affectionately, the great Architect called her: Jerusalem, the City of Peace. GOD was
about to bring the first rational creature into existence. He would be a glorious angel,
among all the most honorable. Adorned by the shine of precious stones, that angel would
live on Mount Zion, as representative of the King of kings before the Universe.

7 With much love, the Creator began to mold the firstborn of angels. All wisdom applied
when forming it, making it perfect. He tenderly granted his life; the beautiful angel, as if
waking from a deep sleep, opened his eyes and looked at the face of his Author. With joy,
the Eternal showed him the beauties of paradise, telling him of His plans, which were
beginning to materialize.

8 When he was led to the place of his abode, next to the throne, the prince of angels was
grateful and, in a melodious voice, sang his first song of praise. From the heights of Zion,
it was discovered, in the eyes of the beautiful angel, Jerusalem in its immensity and
splendor. The river of life, sliding serenely in the middle of the City, resembled a long
avenue, reflecting the beauties of the Garden of Eden and the angelic mansions.

9 Wrapping the firstborn of angels with His mantle of light, the Eternal began to speak to
him of the principles that would govern the universal kingdom. Physical and moral laws
should be respected to the full extent of divine government. Moral laws were summed up
in two basic principles: to love GOD above all things and others as Himself. Each rational
creature should be a channel through which the Eternal could shed other life and light.
That way, the Universe would grow in harmony, happiness and peace.

10 In the kingdom of GOD, laws would not be imposed with tyranny; The subjects would
be free. Obedience should arise spontaneously, in a gesture of recognition and gratitude.
In that realm of freedom, disobedience would also be possible. The result of such
behavior would be the emptying of vital forces.

11 After revealing to the beautiful angel the laws of His government, the Eternal
entrusted him with a mission of great responsibility: he would be the protector of those
laws, and should honor and reveal the Universe ready to be created. With a heart
overflowing with love for GOD and others, it would be up to him to be a model of
perfection: he would be Lucifer, the bearer of light. The prince of the angels; Grateful for
everything, he prostrated himself before the loving King, promising him eternal
faithfulness. The Eternal continued His work of creation, bringing into existence
innumerable hosts of angels, the ministers of the kingdom of light.

12 The Holy City was populated by those radiant creatures who, happy and grateful,
joined the voices in beautiful songs of praise to the Creator. GOD now brought into
existence the Universe that, full of life, would revolve around His throne affirmed in Zion.
Accompanied by His ministers, he set out for the great accomplishment. After
contemplating the immense emptiness, the Eternal raised his mighty hands, ordering the
materialization of the multiform wonders that were to compose the Cosmos.

13 His order, like thunder, reverberated everywhere, causing, as if by charm, galaxies
without numbers, full of worlds and suns — paradise of life and joy — all spinning
harmoniously around Mount Zion. When witnessing such a great fact of the supreme
King, the angelic hosts prostrated themselves, causing a song of triumph to pass through
the illuminated space, in salutation to life.

14 The whole Universe joined in that song of gratitude, in promise of eternal fidelity to
the Creator. Guided by the Eternal, the angels began to know the riches of the Universe.
On that sidereal excursion, they were admired at the immensity of the kingdom of light.
Everywhere they found worlds inhabited by happy creatures who received them at party.
The angels greeted us with songs that spoke of the good news of that kingdom of peace.

15 As precious as life, the freedom to choose, through which creatures could show their
love for the Creator, required proof of faithfulness. With the purpose of revealing it, the
Eternal led the hosts through the illuminated space, until it approached an abyss of
darkness that contrasted with the immense brightness of the galaxies. In the distance,
that abyss had revealed itself insignificant in the eyes of the angels, like a spot without
light; but as he approached, he showed himself in his enormity.

16 The Creator, who at every step revealed to the angels the mysteries of His kingdom,
was silent there, as if keeping a secret for Himself. The darkness of that abyss consisted
in the test of faithfulness. Turning to the hosts, the Eternal solemnly affirmed: - “All the
treasures of the light will be open to your knowledge, except the secrets hidden by
darkness. You are free to serve me or not. Loving the light you will be bound to the
Source of Life “. –

17 With these words, GOD made separation between light and darkness, good and evil.
The Universe was free to choose its destiny.
CHAPTER 2



(An eternity of harmony and peace. Lucifer, transmitter of the revelations of the Father to
his angels. Assemblies on capital planets. Obedience to divine laws, foundation of
progress and happiness. Lucifer is attracted by the darkness of the abyss. Lucifer,
created for the Light Intervention of a loving Father The great inner struggle of Lucifer
The gift of free will Theory of the science of good and evil Foundations of the Eternal
kingdom Betrayal of Lucifer and a third of the hosts. The Eternal warns about the
breaking of the Source of Life, the Universe put to the test, the inconsolable crying of the
Father, the mysterious abyss, symbolic meaning of the kingdom of rebellion, the creation
of the planet Earth.)

1 The long-awaited dream of the Creator was concretized. Now, as a loving Father, he led
the creatures through an eternity of harmony and peace. By virtue of the fulfillment of
divine laws, the Universe expanded in happiness and glory. There was a strong jealousy
of love, which united all strongly. Rational beings, endowed with the capacity of infinite
unfolding, found indescribable pleasure in learning the inexhaustible treasures of divine
Wisdom, transmitting them to the like. They were like channels through which The
Source of Eternal Life nurtured all of love and light.

2 In Jerusalem, the ministers of the kingdom met before the sovereign King, always
ready to fulfill His purposes. It was through Lucifer that the Eternal revealed His designs.
After receiving a new revelation, he promptly transmitted it to the angelic hosts. These,
in turn, shared it with creation. In famous flight the angels were heading towards the
capital planets, where, in large assemblies, the representatives of the other worlds met.
In many of these assemblies, Lucifer was present, filling the participants with joy and
admiration. Perfect in all virtues, he captivated them with his sympathy.

3 No other angel was able to reveal like him the mysteries of the Eternal’s love. The
Universe, feeding on the Source of Life, expanded into an eternity of perfect peace.
Obedience to divine laws was the foundation of all progress and happiness. Although
aware of free will, the desire to depart from the Creator had never risen to the heart of
any creature. This was the case for a long time, until such a problem broke into the life of
the one who was the most intimate of the Eternal.

4 Lucifer, who had dedicated his life to the knowledge of the mysteries of light, was
gradually attracted to darkness. The King of the Universe, in the eyes of whom nothing
can be covered up, sadly accompanied his steps on the downward path that leads to
death. At first, a small curiosity led Lucifer to approach that deep abyss. Contemplating
it, he began to investigate the reason for not being able to understand its enigma.

5 Returning to his place of honor, next to the throne, he prostrated himself before the
divine King, begging him: “Father, let me know the secrets of darkness, just as you
reveal the light to me.” – At the request of the beautiful angel, the Eternal, with an
expressive voice of sadness, said: “My son, you were created for the light, which is life.”
– Convinced that the Creator would not reveal the treasures of darkness, Lucifer decided
to understand the riddle for himself. He was judged qualified for so much. With this sad
decision, the prince of angels allowed a spot of sin to arise in his heart that could bring a
catastrophe to the Universe.

6 Only GOD knew what was going on in Lucifer’s heart. The angel, who had been created
to be the bearer of light, was divorcing in thoughts of the kind Creator who, in an effort
to prevent disaster, begged to remain by His side. A tremendous struggle began to lock
inside. The desire to know the meaning of darkness was immense, yet, the pleas of that
loving Father, whom he did not want to lose, tortured him. Seeing the suffering that his
attitude caused to the Creator, he sometimes showed repentance, but fell again.

7 Before creating the Universe, GOD had already foreseen the possibility of a rebellion.
The risk of granting freedom to the creatures was immense, but without this gift, life
would be meaningless. The Eternal did not want to reign over robots, programmed to do
only His will. He wanted obedience to be the result of recognition and love, so he decided
to take the big risk. Although he continued to search for the meaning of darkness, Lucifer
did not intend to abandon the light.

8 He struggled to reach a combination between those parts that, in the Eternal kingdom,
coexisted separately. Finally, with a feeling of exaltation, he conceived a deceptive
theory, which he intended to present to the Universe as a new system of government,
superior to the Eternal’s government. He called his theory “the science of good and evil.”
Structured in logic, the science of good and evil proved attractive to Lucifer’s eyes,
seeming to reveal a sense of life superior to that offered by the Creator, whose kingdom
enabled only experimental knowledge of good.

9 In the new system, there would be a balance between good and evil, between love and
selfishness, light and darkness. Throughout the time when the science of good and evil
matured in his mind, Lucifer would know how to keep it a secret in front of the Universe.
He continued in his position of honor, fulfilling the function of Bearer of Light. However,
as much as he tried to pretend, his countenance no longer revealed joy in serving the
Eternal. The divine King, who suffered in silence, sought, through His revelations of love,
to prepare the rational creatures for the great approach that was approaching.

10 He knew that many would listen to temptation, turning his back. The night of the test
would make the true faithful stand out, however – those who served the Creator not for
interest, but for love. “Seeing that the time of the test was coming, and that Lucifer was
ready to betray him before the Universe, the Eternal, who had never ceased to reveal the
treasures of his wisdom, became silent and contemplative.

11 Silence revived the memory of that first sidereal excursion in the heart of the hosts,
when, after showing them the riches of the kingdom of light, GOD became silent before
that abyss. They remembered His words: “All the treasures of light will be open to your
knowledge, except the secrets hidden by darkness. You are free to serve me or not.
Loving the light you will be bound to the source of life.” Lucifer, who He had begun to
covet the throne of GOD, inquired about the motive of His silence.The Creator,
contemplating it with infinite sadness, said: “The hour of darkness has come. You are
free to carry out your purposes. ”

12 Seeing that the propitious moment for the propagation of his theory had arrived,
Lucifer summoned the angels for a special meeting. The hosts, eager to know the
meaning of the Father's silence, took their places next to the magnificent angel, who had
always revealed to them the treasures of the kingdom of light. Lucifer began his speech
by exalting, as usual, the government of the Eternal. In a broad retrospective, he
reminded them of the great revelations that had enriched them throughout that eternity.

13 The divine silence presented him as being the indication that the Universe had
reached the fullness of knowledge that came from the light. Silently, the Eternal paved
the way for the understanding of mysteries not yet dreamed, kept until then beyond the
limits of His government. Surprised, the hosts learned of Lucifer’s experience of
darkness. With eloquence, he told them about the science of good and evil, indicating it
as the path of greatest realizations.

14 The effect of his words was soon felt throughout the Universe. The question was
decisive and explosive, generating discord for the first time. Rational beings, in their test,
would have to choose to remain only with the knowledge of the light, which Lucifer
claimed to have reached his limit, or venture into the knowledge of the science of good
and evil. In the beginning, the angels debated at the question, then afterwards the entire
Universe put to the test. It seemed that the science of good and evil was to take away
most of the creatures, however, little by little, many who at first got soaked with the
theory, woke up from the illusion of it, reaffirming their fidelity to the kingdom of the
light.

15 At the end of that conflict, which dragged on for a long time, a third of the stars in the
sky were revealed next to Lucifer, and the rest, although shocked by the test next to the
Eternal. The science of good and evil was proclaimed by Lucifer as a new system of
government. But how to exercise it, if the Eternal continued to reign in Zion? They
needed to find a way to get him out of there. The council, formed by the rebel angels,
began to deal with that. They decided, finally, to request the throne for a certain time, in
which they could demonstrate the excellence of the new system of government. In case
it was approved by the Universe, the new system would be established forever;
otherwise, the domain would return to the Creator.

16 Thus, Lucifer, accompanied by his hosts, approached arrogantly before that suffering
Father, making such a request. The Eternal was not ambitious, he only wanted good for
His creatures. If the science of good and evil really consisted of a greater good, it would
not oppose its implantation, yielding the throne to its defenders. More He knew that this
path would lead to unhappiness and death. Moved by His protective love, the Creator
disregarded the request of the rebel hosts, who turned away enraged.

17 When the throne was denied, Lucifer and his hosts began to accuse the divine King,
claiming to be his government of tyranny. They claimed to be his permanence on the
throne the most obvious demonstration of His arbitrariness. Hadn’t he granted them
freedom to choose? Why neutralize it now, preventing them from implementing a
superior government system? The accusations of the rebel hosts reverberated
throughout the Universe, making it appear that the Eternal’s government was unfair. This
brought deep distress to those who remained faithful to the kingdom of light.

18 Not knowing how to refute such accusations, these creatures, silenced by moral pain,
longed for the moment when new revelations from the Creator could clarify the
mysteries of that great conflict. The accusations and blasphemies of the rebel hosts
reached the climax when the Eternal, in a surprising gesture, rose from His throne, as
soon as he left it. The infidels, in the expectation of a conquest, quieted down, while a
feeling of fear penetrated the heart of the subjects of the light.

19 Would He surrender the dominion of all creation, to get rid of vile accusations?
According to the logic from which Lucifer based his teachings, there was no other
alternative to the Creator. In this tremendous expectation, the Universe accompanied the
steps of GOD. In a gesture of humility, the Creator stripped himself of His crown and His
royal robe, placing them on the white throne. In His countenance there was no
expression of resentment or anger, but of infinite love and sadness. With solemnity, the
Eternal proclaimed that the decisive moment had arrived, when each creature should
seal its decision by the light or darkness.

20 In a wide revelation, he warned of the consequences of a break with the Source of
Life. With a look of tenderness the Creator looked at his children. It was a look of
humility, which, full of love, begged to remain by His side. Countless creatures, moved,
corresponded to His look of kindness, while a crowd remained downcast. Lucifer and his
followers were aware of the seriousness of that moment. It was still possible to turn back
their plans, surrendering repentance to the divine Father who had always loved them.

21 While crestfallen considered the final decision, Lucifer and his followers heard the
song of those who, in recognition and gratitude, stood beside the Eternal. The last fight
was at the heart of the infidels who, shuddering, came to think about retiring. Finally, the
memory of the recent divine gesture, stripping the crown, gave them the certainty that
the government would be handed over to them. Seeing that the Throne remained empty,
Lucifer and his hosts, dominated by greed, finally broke with the Creator. Seeing a third
of the subjects go through the divisions of eternal separation, GOD let out the distressing
pain that for so long martyred His heart, curving in inconsolable crying.

22 Contemplating His rebellious children, he raised his voice in a painful lamentation:
“My children, my children! I can no longer call you that! I would like to have you in my
arms so much! I remember when I formed you with love! You came forth happy and
perfect, in chords of hope in eternal harmony! I lived for you, covering you with glory and
power! You were my joy! Why did your hearts change so much? Oh what else could I
have done to make you stay with me? Today my soul bleeds in pain from the eternal
separation!
23 How will I look to the empty places where so many times the voices raised in festive
hosannas, without a mixture of happiness and pain coming to mind ?! Infinite nostalgia
already invades my being, and I know it will be eternal! Today my heart broke and broke;
I will carry the scars forever! After proclaiming in sorrow so painful lamentation, the
Eternal one addressed Lucifer, the cause of all evil, saying: “You received a name of
honor when you were created. Now they will not call you more Lucifer, but Satan, the
enemy of Creator and His laws. “ After lamenting the downfall of the rebel hosts, the
Eternal, in slow steps, was absent from the Garden of Eden, place of the Universal
Throne.

24 Where would His dwelling be now? The faithful hosts accompanied reverent His
mysterious steps of abandonment, which seemed to reveal a difficult future, of suffering
and humiliation. Would the rebels occupy the divine throne, desecrating it as the domain
of sin? This inquiry tortured the hearts of the subjects of the Eternal. Leaving His beloved
City, the Lord of light led himself, in the midst of the glories of the Universe, in the
direction of the immense abyss, which he had silenced until then. There he stopped once
more, muted, while he seemed to read in the darkness a future of great struggles.

25 Faced with the suffering of the Eternal, expressed in the sadness of his countenance,
the faithful could finally understand the meaning of that mysterious abyss: it consisted of
a symbolic representation of the kingdom of rebellion. In the saddened face of GOD there
was, finally, a glow that encouraged the faithful. Raising the powerful arms in the dark,
he ordered loudly: “Let there be light.” Immediately, the light of His presence flooded the
deep abyss and, triumphing over darkness, revealed an unfinished world, covered by
crystalline waters. With that gesture, the Eternal began a great battle for the claim of His
government of light; battle of love against selfishness; of justice against injustice; of
humility against pride; of freedom against slavery; of life against death.

26 Battle that, without truce, would extend until, at the desired dawn, the divine King
could return victorious to the holy Mount Zion, where, enthroned in the midst of the
praises of the redeemed, he would reign forever in perfect peace. The darkness, in its
escape, pointed towards the final annihilation of the rebellion. The abundant waters that
covered that world, hitherto hidden, symbolized the eternal life that for the faithful would
be conquered by the love that everything sacrifices. The revealed world was the earth.
Visited by darkness and light, she would be the stage of the great struggle. The faithful
rejoiced at the triumph of the light on that first day, when darkness in their fury rolled
over the planet, succumbing it in dense darkness.

27 The light, which seemed defeated, was reborn victorious in a beautiful dawn. Upon
scratching the light of a second day, the Eternal ordered: “There is an expansion in the
midst of the waters, and there is separation between water and waters.” Immediately,
the heat of His light caused an immense amount of steam to rise from the waters,
enveloping the planet in a blanket of indigo transparency. Thus the atmosphere arose,
with its perfect mixture of gases that would be essential for the life that would soon
crown the planet. The Creator, contemplating the expansion, called it “heavens.”
28 The atmosphere, which filled the earth with brightness, darkened as the twilight of
another sunset ensued.




CHAPTER 3



(Creation works continue. Water separation. Vegetation. The garden of Eden is
transferred to the new planet. The great luminaries. Sea creatures. Volatile creatures.
Earth creatures. Creation of Adam, the first man. Adam prostrates in reverent adoration.
Paradise state of the earth. Adam admired a creature and called it “lamb.” The lamb, a
likeness of the Eternal. The promise of a companion. Adam’s deep sleep. Eve is created
for Adam. Royal mantle and a crown given to man as an honor of the Eternal Adam and
Eve show submission by placing their crown at the feet of the Creator Man, faithful
steward, rational scepter and arbiter of creation Adam and Eve are made aware of Satan.
The tree of life and the tree of science of good and evil. Satan opts for deception as a
weapon to make man eat the forbidden fruit.)

1 When darkness was overcome on the third day, the Creator continued His work,
bringing forth the immense continents that were still beneath the surface of the waters.
With raised hands he ordered: “Join the waters under the heavens in one place and the
dry portion appears.” In prompt obedience, the crystalline waters gave their superior
position to the dry portion that rose, overlapping them. In the lower regions of the earth,
the waters would continue to reflect the heavenly glow, being a snack for thirsty
creatures. In that gesture of humility, the waters foreshadowed the Creator, who in the
great struggle had descended into the deepest abyss to make eternal life reborn in
thirsty souls.

2 Contemplating the face of that new world, the Eternal called the dry part “earth,” and
the gathering of the waters he called “seas.” In his powerful voice he continued,
ordering: “Produce the earth green grass, grass that gives seed, fruitful tree that bears
fruit according to its species, whose seed is in it on the earth.” In obedience to the divine
command, the solid surface of the planet was covered with all kinds of vegetation:
beautiful meadows to bloom, green fields crisscrossed by crystalline rivers, endless
forests where leafy trees allowed to hang tasty fruits of countless species. The earth was
like a cloth where the Creator, by the power of His word, colored pictures of unparalleled
beauty.

3 While with admiration the hosts contemplated the beauties of that creation, they were
surprised to recognize on the new planet the garden of Eden, place of the divine throne.
The Eternal, by the power of His word, had transferred him to the bosom of that special
world, where in justice the government of the Universe would be confirmed. On that
spring day, the breeze gently caressed the green forests and the flowering meadows,
flooding the atmosphere with a soft aroma and freshness. Contemplating His work, the
Creator happily exclaimed: "Behold, everything is very good.” Exuberant, the planet
fulfilled another day in its harmonious rotation. The faithful hosts could now better
understand the importance of divine light. His absence had obfuscated, on that night,
the beauties of Zion. On that new day, the Creator would express His great power, giving
the earth luminaries that would fill it with light and heat.

4 Those luminaries would remain forever as symbols of the spiritual presence of the
Eternal, which is the source of all light. Contemplating the dark and empty space that
extended around the earth, with a powerful voice he ordered: “Let there be luminaries in
the expansion of the heavens, so that there is separation between day and night; be
they by signs and for certain times, to days and years. And be for luminaries in the
expansion of the heavens to light the earth. “ Immediately, the space became radiant
due to the brightness of the sun and the reflection of planets and satellites. Before this
demonstration of power, the faithful hosts knelt in reverent worship. On the fourth day,
the Eternal created the worlds of our solar system not to be inhabited like the earth, but
for the balance of the system.

5 They also filled the sky with glare, softening the darkness of earthly nights. Turning his
eyes to the ground, the hosts were glad to see her radiant in colors. Very close to it you
could see the moon that, with its silver reflection, would scare away the deep night
shadows. Wrapped up by that enchanting scenario, the children of light, rejoicing,
greeted the dawn of the fifth day, which would be of many surprises. The Eternal would
turn the festive land by the presence of countless species of irrational animals that would
inhabit the entire surface of the planet. That creation would have continuity on the sixth
day.

6 Raising the mighty hands, the Creator, looking first at the crystal clear waters, ordered:
“Produce the abundantly reptilian waters of the living soul.” Immediately, the waters
became undulating by the presence of countless species of reptiles that, happy and
grateful, celebrated the existence in a continuous swim and jump. From microscopic
beings to great whales, all appeared in complete harmony, reflecting in their nature the
love of the Creator. Putting his eyes on the indigo atmosphere that rested on the green
forests, the Eternal continued: “Birds fly over the face of the expansion of the heavens.”
Through His order, the Heavens were filled with colorful birds that, flying in all directions,
had in their hearts a song of gratitude for life. This song filled the air, mixing with the
perfume of flowering bushes.

7 Contemplating with pleasure His earthly creatures, the Eternal blessed them by saying:
“Fructify and multiply and henchid the waters in the seas, and the birds multiply on the
earth.” Rejoicing, the faithful hosts witnessed the dawn of the sixth day. And what would
GOD create on that new day? This question reigned in the minds of all rational beings.
They were sure that something very special was about to happen. Raising the mighty
arms, the Eternal ordered: “Produce the living soul earth according to its species: cattle,
reptiles and wild beasts of the earth, according to its species.” His powerful voice was
quickly heard and, in the woods and fields, the result of His creative power could be
seen.

8 Animals of all species woke up to a happy existence, in the middle of a paradise of
perfect peace. The land became extremely beautiful, which princess adorned to receive
its king and lord. Who would that special being be? Moving with majesty, the Eternal
came down to the glories of the new world, heading to the garden of Eden, place of the
divine throne. The angels of the light accompanied him reverently, stopping like clouds
over the skies of paradise. The entire Universe watched with deep interest the
development of the acts of the Creator, in response to the accusations of his enemies.

9 The moment was decisive. Everything indicated that the Eternal would prove not to be
tyrant or selfish, crowning someone on Mount Zion. Satan and his followers did not doubt
that the kingdom would be given to them and they would reign victorious in the bosom
of that ancient abyss, where darkness and light were now intertwined. The subjects of
the light shuddered at that perspective. Next to the source of the river of life, the Eternal
knelt solemnly and, with the natural elements of the Earth, began to mold, with much
love, a special creature. After a few moments, the body, still lifeless, of the first man was
extended before the Creator. The Eternal looked at him and, after stroking his cold,
discolored face, he breathed into his nostrils the breath of life and the man began to live.

10 As if waking up from a dream, the man opened his eyes and contemplated the sweet
face of His Creator who, smiling, kissed his face now colorful and full of life. He was
moved to hear the Eternal say in a soft and affectionate voice: “My son, my dear son!”
Because he was born on earth, the first man received the name of Adam. Taking him by
the hand, the Eternal lifted him. Without perceiving the scene of glare that surrounded
him, Adam, in a gesture of gratitude for existence, enveloped the Creator in a tender
embrace, prostrating himself in reverent worship. The faithful hosts who admired
witnessed the great divine fulfillment, excited at the human gesture, also prostrated
themselves in reverent worship.

11 Then they united the voices in a song of joy in salutation to that special creature, who
woke up to life at such a decisive moment for the Universe. With a heart full of
happiness, Adam joined the angels in his song of praise. His voice, as it passed through
the flowery surroundings, was mixed with the song of the birds and the death of the
animals that approached festively. In a walk of unforgettable surprises, Adam was made
aware of the beauties of his home. With admiration, he saw Mount Zion, where the river
of life flowed, in a cascade of light. The glorious mountain lay crowned by a beautiful
rainbow. In his steps, he followed the course of the crystalline river, which glided
serenely amidst the wonders of Eden.

12 One admired the tall trees that, soaked by the breeze, left abundant flowers and fruits
hanging from the branches. He leaned here and there, attracted by the glow of precious
stones that adorned the lawn everywhere. With intense joy, Adam was aware of the
infinite species of animals that populated the garden. All were meek and submissive and
lived in perfect harmony and happiness. Stopping in his footsteps, Adam admired the
whiteness and tenderness of an animal that was jumping on the grass. Approaching, he
took it in his arms, dedicating a special affection. Well, it was nice to stroke her white
wool! His sweet eyes reflected a glow of love and humility. There was something special
about that little animal. Affectionately, Adam called him "lamb."

13 With the little animal in his arms, Adam looked grateful toward the Eternal and
worshiped Him. Contemplating His white robes, His expressive eyes of an unparalleled
love, Adam discovered that he had in his arms a symbol of his Author. Happy, he
exclaimed: “Oh, Lord, this little lamb clad in such white wool, with an expressive look of
so much love, looks like You. I want to have him always with me.” Watching the animals,
Adam perceived that they enjoyed a special fellowship. I saw happy couples everywhere
living for each other. His thoughts turned to His Companion. He looked around and was
surprised not to see him. The Eternal had concealed himself on purpose, becoming
invisible.

14 Adam felt lonely in the midst of that paradise. With whom would you share your
happiness and love? There were animals there, but they were irrational, unable to share
their ideals. He was born in his heart, walking alone in that sunset, a burning desire to
find someone who could always be by his side. While Adam looked toward the distant
hills in the hope of seeing someone, the Eternal appeared at his side and said: “It is not
good for the man to be alone; I will make him a companion.”

15 Adam was happy to hear from the Creator that promise, just at the moment when he
so longed to have someone so that he would always be visible at his side. Taken by a
deep sleep, Adam leaned back in the chest of his loving Creator who, with caresses,
made him numb. In his subconscious the first colorful dreams arose: Contemplate the
Eternal’s tender gaze; he hears the harmonious sound of angelic music; discover the
wonders around: Mount Zion with its rainbow; The river of life; the meadows in bloom;
the animals that greeted him at the party. The scenes that surrounded him in his longing
are repeated In his dream; he looks around in the hope of finding his partner, but he
doesn’t see it. He feels lonely in his dream, and that makes him look for someone with
whom to share his existence.

16 His gaze stretches through greening countryside, seeing in the distance flowery hills.
While walking hopefully, feel the gentle breeze gently stroke her hair. Talk to the breeze:
”Breeze, you seem to be who I am looking for so much; you caress my hair; you kiss my
face; you have the perfume of green bushes! If I could see your face, I would kiss it; if I
could touch your hair, make long braids and decorate them with the flowers of our
garden! “ After walking in the dream through the meadows of paradise, Adam stopped
while contemplating the surrounding landscape. He admired not seeing the effect of the
breeze on the flowering branches. But how, if he felt it warmly on his face?

17 Then he began to wake up from his dream. Still with his eyes closed, he remembered
the moment when, sleepy, he lay on the Eternal’s chest. Would the breeze be the touch
of His hands? With this question he opened his eyes and was excited to see a pretty
woman who, with scented hands, caressed her face with love. It was the breeze of his
dream; the promise of a Creator who just wanted to make him happy. Now Adam was
complete, for he had Eve, who was flesh of his flesh and bones of his bones. Taking her
by the hand, Adam invited her for a walk of unforgettable surprises. He would show his
companion the beauties of his home.

18 Sensitized Eva stopped at every step, attracted by the flowers that exhaled soft
perfumes; for the birds that sang happy songs; for the animals that followed them
submissive; by the vegetation of rich nuances; through the crystalline waters of the river
of life that flowed cascade from Mount Zion. Everything in paradise was perfect and
beautiful, but nothing equaled the human being, created in the image of GOD. They
turned to each other in admiration and caresses. Soaked by that love, they remained
until sunset. With delight, the young couple began to contemplate the setting sun that,
through pink rays, colored the sky in a beautiful tree.

19 It was the sixth day that came to an end, giving rise to the hours of a special day:
Saturday. That day, in its meaning, would be solemn for all subjects of the Eternal, for its
dawn would bring victory to the kingdom of light. The sun, which on the sixth day had
brightened nature with its brightness and heat, was hidden, leaving it in cold shadows.
The cheerful birds, silencing their trills, looked for their nests while the other animals
were collected. Only the couple remained motionless, trying to see, in the last flash that
went out on the horizon, the hope of a new dawn. They investigated the sense of
darkness when, among the bushes, they saw a beautiful place, whose silver rays bathed
in silver rays bathed the nature in soft luminosity.

20 The whole sky was illuminated by the glow of the stars. Admired, they discovered that
the night was only darkness when they looked down. Adam and Eve in their innocence
did not know that that night symbolized the bleak future of humanity. When they
understood it, they would be comforted to contemplate the brightness of the heavens:
the place would speak of hope and the twinkling stars would attest to the interest of the
hosts of light in clearing their moral darkness, giving encouragement to sinners. But only
those who, diverting their eyes from the earth, contemplated the high heavens would be
enlightened.

21 After contemplating the sky for some time in its luminosity, the couple remembered
the beauties of paradise, turned their eyes, seeking to see them. They were, however,
hidden in the middle of the shadows. How much they wished for dawn, for only he would
bring paradise! Before the longing of the human heart, the Eternal appeared in the midst
of darkness, returning to the couple the joy of meeting again in a colorful garden. Bathed
in soft light, they were now walking through green and flowery meadows. The brightness
of the Creator woke up the nature where they passed, coloring and brightening
everything around.

22 The couple, admired, learned that next to the Eternal they could have a paradise in
the middle of the night. Feeling sleepy, Adam and Eve lay on the lap of the loving Father,
who made them fall asleep sweetly, hopeful in a happy awakening. Leaving them on the
soft grass, the Eternal rose to the side of the contemplative hosts. He would manifest
again at dawn, waking the couple for the most solemn event, which would reduce to dust
the most vile accusations of the enemies. The dark and cold night, through its long
hours, seemed to mock the light. Would you forever obfuscate the beauties of creation?
Oh, never! The sun would not recede in the face of darkness; He would appear shortly as
a liberator, snatching with his warm rays the nature of the cold claws, giving him life and
color.

23 In a final challenge, darkness became dense in the hours before dawn. The night
lashed out his forces to fight for usurped rule. Finally, a flash appeared in the east that
seemed to speak of hope in a new day. The sky gradually became colorful of a reddish
alive. The helpless darkness withdrew from the rising force of light and was consumed in
its escape. Nature began to wake up from the long night, reflecting in its bosom the
nostalgic rays. Flowers would open, exhaling perfumes of joy; Animals and birds, silenced
at night, joined the voices in a triumphant chant in salutation at the dawn of that great
day.

24 The black night had come to an end, giving rise to the daylight dreamed – it was a
special meaning for GOD, because it foreshadowed the final victory of His kingdom over
the dominion of rebellion. – The Eternal would now wake up His human children who,
bathed in the light of His presence, had slept in the hope of a happy dawn. In a festive
march, all the holy hosts, with songs of victory, accompanied him to the paradise bathed
in light. When they were close, the Creator stopped staring at the sleeping couple, and
exclaimed softly: “Wake up my children.” His voice entered Adam and Eve’s ears, waking
them up for the happiest communion.

25 How quickly he scratched the long-awaited morning, bringing in his light the sweet
paradise, lost in that night! With joy the couple greeted their divine Creator, joining the
angels in triumphant antiphons. The Universe lived a truly solemn moment. On that
festive morning, the Eternal was to reveal the greatness of His character, which is justice
and love. The accusations that His government was selfish and tyranny would be refuted.
In the eyes of all the rational creatures of the vast Universe, GOD led the young couple
to Mount Zion, place of the divine throne.

26 There, before the shudder of the muted hosts, the Creator, in a surprising gesture,
covered the man with the royal robe, placing on his head the crown that had been
coveted by Lucifer. Moved by deep gratitude for the supreme honor conferred, deep
childbirth Adam and Eve bowed reverently, placing their precious crown at the feet of the
Creator, in sign of submission. A cry of victory followed that human gesture that shook
the entire Creation. The children of the light, who for so long had suffered insults and
humiliations in the face of the constant accusations of the rebel hosts, praised in praise
the blessed GOD, who in His work of justice denied the enemies, revealing His character
of humility, detachment and love.

27 Having constituted man as the lord of all creation, the Eternal, with a solemn voice,
began to make him aware of the greatness of his mission. As a faithful steward, you
should take care of paradise, keeping the source of the river of life clean. The laws of
justice and love, foundations of the kingdom of light, should be honored. As a rational
scepter, it would be up to man, in a gesture of recognition and gratitude, to freely accept
the government of the One who created it. The hosts, who marveled witnessed the
revelation of divine detachment, understood that the Lord of Light would no longer rule
the Universe, except with human consent.

28 Man, by the will of the Eternal, was made the arbiter of creation; in his glorious being,
made in the image of the Creator, the seal of eternal dominion shone. After revealing to
the couple the infinite honor and responsibility of their mission, the Creator made them
aware of the spiritual conflict that was working for the conquest of universal dominion:
Lucifer, who for countless ages had served the divine King in Zion, had been corrupted
by pride and selfishness, being followed by a third of the rational hosts; they sought now
to dethrone the Eternal, dishonoring him with vile accusations.

29 Having revealed to the human being the painful situation in which the Universe was,
the Eternal, in a solemn gesture, showed them two tall trees that, loaded with great
fruits, rose on both banks of the river that was born from the throne. To the one who rose
to the right the Lord revealed to be the tree of life monument of the kingdom of light. To
the one who stood on the other shore he revealed himself to be the tree of the science of
good and evil – a symbol of rebellion. – By eating the fruit of the tree of life, man would
manifest his submission to the Creator, which is the Source of life and light. To eat from
the other tree would be to give the enemy the dominion of Zion.

30 The inevitable result of that step would be eternal death, not only for the human
being, but for all creation, which would be reduced to chaos under the fury of rebellion.
After contemplating the two tall trees, which externalized in their fruits such infinite
responsibility, Adam prostrated himself before the Creator, saying: “You are worthy Lord
to reign over the Universe, because by Your wisdom, love and power all things were
created and they subsist. “ On Saturday, emblem of divine triumph, swelled with praise.

31 All the children of the light joined the human being in the most harmonious song of
exaltation to Him whose greatness is unparalleled. It was with horror that Satan and his
followers witnessed the great realization of the Eternal. They witnessed with bitterness
the joy of the faithful before the coronation of man, an event that threw down the strong
accusations they had raised against the divine government. Full of anger and frustration,
they now considered his sad condition. How terrible and humiliating was the thought of
seeing their plans of rebellion vanish before the Creator, similar to the shadows of that
night.

32 If they could, they thought, they would fill the Sabbath with darkness, erasing any
hope of victory from the minds of the subjects of the Eternal. Finally, in their
considerations, Satan and his leaders understood that they had an opportunity: in the
middle of the garden of Eden, on the heights of Zion, the tree of the science of good and
evil was rising, next to the river of life. . A human gesture would be enough, nothing
more, and they would have under their power, for ever, the coveted domain. But how to
seduce him? Encouraged by the prospect of a conquest, Satan sought ingeniously to
formulate a boarding plan. He knew that if he failed in his attempt, all hopes of triumph
would have dissolved, all his dreams of adventure crumbling. He concluded that
deception was to be his powerful weapon.
33 – Was it not through him that he managed to dominate a third of the heavenly
hosts ?! He would wait, therefore, for an auspicious moment to arm his ambush. –



CHAPTER 4



(Eden, a kingdom of eternal joy. Visit and daily instruction of the Eternal. Work, source of
development of faculties. Through visits of celestial beings, Adam and Eve acquired
knowledge about the rebellion of Lucifer. GOD reveals to His hosts Satan’s evil intentions
and sends two angels to warn man. Satan takes possession of a snake to deceive Eve.
Arguments of Satan to make Eve fall. Adam’s intense internal struggle in the face of his
wife’s fallen condition. Adam eats of the fruit, he remains at his wife’s side paying the
high price of his rebellion, wonderful revelation of the rescue plan, the nature of the
creations and of Adam and Eve changes, the Father promises them lasting garments.)

1 In Eden the sweet calm of perfect peace reigned. Everywhere the kind little birds made
their cheerful trills heard in constant praise of the Creator. All nature at flowering seemed
to proclaim a kingdom of eternal joy. Animals in union jumped everywhere, always
submissive to man, the lord of that lovely paradise. Everything was happiness for the
couple; but this became more intense in the rotation of those spring days. The tree,
which with its beauty colored the sky forewarning the dark nights, also announced the
time of the Eternal’s daily visit. Together, in the light of His presence, they spent a long
time in happy conversation.

2 With courage, the couple told the Lord the amazing wonders that they discovered
every day in nature. GOD, with love, discovered the meaning of each being. How grateful
they were for the beautiful lessons learned at His feet! As each day passed, there was
greater love, respect and admiration for the great Creator. How good He had been,
bringing them into existence and granting them a home so full of delicacies! When they
woke up to the joys of each day, the caresses and sweet song of the Eternal came to
mind, which made them fall asleep every night.

3 The life of Adam and Eve in Eden was not idle. Garden care was recommended to
them. Its occupation was not annoying, on the contrary, it was pleasant and invigorating.
The Creator had Indicated work as a source of benefits for man, in order to occupy the
mind and strengthen the body, developing all the faculties. In mental and physical
activity, man found a high pleasure. It was common for the young couple to receive visits
from celestial beings.

4 Visitors always had news to report and questions to ask. They spent a long time
hearing about them talking about the wonders of the kingdom of light. Through those
visitors, Adam and Eve began to have extensive knowledge of Lucifer’s rebellion and its
eternal consequences. Visitors, Adam and Eve always asked to be taught the harmonious
heavenly songs. How they delighted to join the voices to the angelic choir! In His
omniscience, GOD had knowledge of the enemy’s terrible intention.
5 Summoning His main hosts, He revealed to them with regret the imminent danger that
loomed over the Universe. Satan was to ambush in order to take man to eat from the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Before that revelation, the children of the light
were fearful, for they knew the tremendous ease of Satan in linking innocent creatures
and binding them in their meshes of death. In the solemn council, they decided to send,
urgently, messengers to warn the man of great danger.

6 Two powerful angels were charged with that decisive mission. Immediately,
commissioned messengers stormed through the gates of Jerusalem, reaching the bosom
of infinite space. In moments, they passed immensities, crossing galaxies in the course.
They entered the tunnel of the constellation Orion, approaching the new system. They
could now see a short distance from the blue planet, where the destiny of the Universe
was to be determined.

7 In Eden, there was relaxation. The young couple continued in their innocent activities,
enjoying the pleasure of a happy life. They were far from thinking that at that moment all
or all the children of the light were tense, thinking about their threatened future. Then
they saw in the clear sky the sign of the approach of the heavenly visitors and they
raised their arms in joyful salutation. However, Adam and Eve admired each other, for
not seeing the same joy in their countenance.

8 Visitors brought an expression of anxiety on their faces that they could not understand.
They tried to change the sad faction, telling them the new discoveries made in paradise.
The messengers, still, not having time available as on other occasions, interrupted them
with words of warning. Satan would ambush them in order to take them to eat the fruit of
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. If they heard temptation, they would
succumb the entire creation into the abyss of eternal chaos.

9 The angels reminded them that the kingdom had been entrusted to them as a sacred
deposit, owing, in a life of faithfulness, to honor Him who for love was stripped, placing
himself in a position of host of the human being. Adam and Eve should be firm before the
insinuations of the enemy, for thus they would seal the eternal victory of the kingdom of
light. Speaking to them of the happy reward that would follow their triumph, the angels
revealed that it was GOD’s plan to transfer the Heavenly Jerusalem to Earth. There, again
coupled to paradise, it would remain forever.

10 And man, submissive to the Creator, would reign for ever and ever on Mount Zion, in
the midst of the praises of the universal hosts. More all that depended entirely on human
positioning in the face of the temptations of the enemy, who would do everything to
snatch the kingdom. Adam and Eve were afraid to know Satan’s plans, but they were
comforted to learn that he could not do him any harm, forcing them to eat the forbidden
fruit. If, however, he tried to intimidate them with his power, all the Eternal's hosts would
come to his aid.

11 The messengers of the light concluded their mission by recommending the couple to
remain vigilant, always keeping in mind the responsibility that rested upon them. They
should not be separated from each other, not even for a moment, because they alone
could be seduced. Adam and Eve, grateful for the angels’ warnings, joined the voices in a
song of promise in an eternal victory. They were sure that they would never abandon the
blessed Creator, hearing the tempter’s voice.

12 Encouraged by the human promise, the two messengers returned to the bosom of the
Celestial Jerusalem where, together with the holy hosts, they would anxiously await the
desired triumph. Satan saw the messengers approaching paradise and heard the song of
man promising an eternal victory. That song made his envy and hatred increase so that
he could not contain them. He then told his followers that he would soon silence that
irritating voice. He would do everything to transform human praise into blasphemies of
the Creator.

13 The rebel hosts were curious to know their boss’s plans, but were warned by him that
they should wait until everything was forever determined. If man heard his voice, eating
from the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, he would be victorious,
forever possessing the domain of the Universe. If man resisted, remaining faithful to the
Creator, there would be no hope for them. Paradise seemed to be surrounded by eternal
security, but in the countenance of man one could see an expression of fear.

14 Since the angels departed, Adam and Eve remained silent, meditating reverently on
the enormous responsibility of their mission. They thought of the seriousness of that
impending test that would seal their future and that of the entire Creation. Encouraged,
however, before the thought of victory, they once again united the voices in a song that
expressed the certainty of the coveted victory. That melody removed from their minds all
the fear of defeat and, happily, they ran through the green meadows, accompanied by
the fiery animals that seemed to commemorate the great conquest.

15 They felt safe in their paradise, totally forgotten about the danger of a possible
assault. Satan, who was watching the couple closely, perceived that his opportunity was
coming. He approached the paradise invisibly, and was waiting for the best time to arm
his ambush. Unaware of the presence of the enemy, the couple continued in their
detached joy, playing carelessly with the animals. In the deranged countenance of Satan
a malicious smile was stamped, witnessing a carelessness of the couple: in their
exaltation, they had stopped attending the last recommendation of the messengers,
turning away from each other.

16 The cunning enemy, wasting no time, took possession of a snake, the most beautiful
in paradise, making it gracefully approach Eva. Eva, who sat on the grass playing with
animals, perceived the presence of the attractive snake, whose body reflected the colors
of the rainbow. She was admired to see her pick flowers and fruits from the garden,
placing them at her feet. Grateful, he took her in his arms, dedicating affection.

17 Having conquered the affection of the woman, Satan, in his cunning, began to attract
her to be next to the tree of the science of good and evil. Without realizing the danger,
Eva accompanied the snake to the test tree. There, holding the hidden enemy in his
arms, he caressed him and said words of love. With the brightness of seduction in his
eyes, the snake began to speak. His words were full of wisdom and tenderness and his
voice like that of an angel.

18 Eve could hardly believe her eyes. His joy became immense for having such a
fantastic creature in his arms. They began to talk about many things: love; the beauties
of the garden; The power of the Creator. Eva was admired at the extensive knowledge of
the snake, which ran with mastery on any subject. Wrapped by that experience, Eva
completely forgot about her partner. Not even the angels’ warnings passed through his
mind. Adam, entirely forgotten about the advice of the heavenly messengers, had
appeared in the company of some animals.

19 After a while, the memory of the warnings received came with momentum in his
mind. The last words spoken by the angels sounded clearly in his ears: “Do not depart
from each other … Do not separate for a moment, it is dangerous.” His heart pounded
when he didn’t see Eva at his side. Then he raised his voice in an anxious shout. His
voice, when impacting through the vaults of paradise, however, did not bring an answer.
The silence almost stifled him. In his affliction he ran from side to side, looking for her, in
vain.

20 In that anxious search, she felt the breeze caress her hair and remembered her first
dream. That memory, however, was undone at the thought of the danger that
threatened them. With the mind taken by a great sense of guilt, Adam hastened the pace
in the anguished search. Where would your beloved be? Would he wrap her in time in his
arms, freeing her from falling? More than once he raised his voice in an anxious shout
that reverberated throughout the garden: “Eva, where are you?” He waited for an
answer, but heard only an empty echo that despaired. He remembered the tree of
science of good and evil; there was the only place where his partner could be deceived.

21 Hoping to obstruct the enemy’s only opportunity, he advanced in the direction of the
test site. His heart pounded when he contemplated the cup of the forbidden tree in the
distance. With the snake in her arms, Eva questioned her about many things. He
marveled at the perception that the snake was overwhelming her greatly in knowledge.
Full of curiosity, she asked the snake: - Where is the source of your great knowledge?
Answer me, because I want to own it too. – Without wasting time, Satan, pointing to the
tree of science of good and evil, replied: - there is the source of all my knowledge. –

22 He then told him a liar story: he said he was a snake like the others, eating the fruits
of paradise. Tasting a certain day of that forbidden fruit, he received, as if by charm, all
the virtues. Looking towards the tree of science of good and evil, Eva was surprised and
confused. Would the Creator deprive in his love something so good to his creatures ?!
Seeing her surprised, Satan asked: - Is it so that GOD said: You shall not eat of all the
trees in the garden? – Eva, restless, replied: - From the fruits of the garden trees we eat,
more of the fruit of that tree that you claim to be a source of wisdom, GOD said: “You
shall not eat of it, so that you do not die.” – The snake in disdainful tone said: “That is
false.” If so, I would have died.
23 Certainly the Eternal forbade them to eat from that tree to prevent man from
receiving like Him, knowing all things. – The seductive words of the snake caused
confusion in Eva’s mind. Who would you trust? He had in mind the memory of the
Creator’s order and his sentence, but at the same time he had before him a palpable
proof that contradicted Him. Dazed, she began to doubt the character of the Eternal. In a
challenge, the snake picked fruits from the forbidden tree and began to savor them.

24 Placing a fruit in the woman’s hands, he encouraged her to eat, saying: - Didn’t the
Eternal say that if someone touched that fruit he would die? – A complete silence reigned
over the Universe. On every inhabited planet, the children of light watched helplessly
that distressing scene. Their future was at stake. In Jerusalem there was great
commotion. Powerful angels appeared before the Creator, requesting permission to
unmask the cowardly enemy, hidden in that snake. The Eternal, however, prevented
them from doing so. If the use of force were the solution, I would have already applied it.

25 They should respect the free will granted to man, and he may manifest his choice
under the temptation of the enemy. The children of the light suffered immensely when
they saw the woman doubting the One who had kindly given them life and the
opportunity to reign in that paradise. How could I doubt who gave them so much love ?!
Adam, who, in a strong hope of securing the cherished victory, hurried in his run, stared
into the distance at his beloved, sitting by the tree of evidence.

26 What was Eva doing in that dangerous place ?! A horrible feeling came upon him,
once again remembering the warnings received, but he tried to banish him with the
thought that he would reach his wife before any evil occurred to her. Eva hesitated in her
conviction as she contemplated the fruit in her hands. For a few moments the future
seemed bleak and frightening, but he overcame that feeling, thinking of the glories that
he would conquer by eating that fruit. Still somewhat hesitant, he slowly raised his hands
until he touched the fruit with his lips.

27 The subjects of the kingdom of the light, shuddering, bowed in great terror. It seemed
almost impossible, at that moment, for the woman to go back. While pale the faithful
inquired about a possible hope, they witnessed with horror the terrible decision of Eve:
She had resolved to break forever with the Creator, becoming captive of death. The
Eternal, who in silent pain contemplated that scene of rebellion, bowed his forehead with
his face bathed in tears.

28 I couldn’t bear the pain of that separation. The faithful, who in panic believed
themselves defeated, were aware that not everything was lost. If Adam resisted
temptation, remaining faithful to the Eternal, he would seal the great victory. Eve, who
had been the victim of a hoax, could be aware of her mistake, being favored with divine
forgiveness. When Adam in his anguished run reached the test site, it was too late.
Sitting by the river, Eva casually savored the forbidden fruit.

29 Adam shivered. Would it be the same fruit of the test? In a gesture of hope he looked
at the tree of science of good and evil, but in tears he recognized the sad condemnation.
Full of sadness, he looked at his wife, but found no words to wake her from the bitter
reality. In complete despair, he raised his voice in a painful exclamation: “Eva, Eva, what
are you doing?” By eating the forbidden fruit, the woman was taken by emotions that
made her imagine having reached a higher sphere of life. Hearing the voice of her
husband, still taken by illusory emotions, she raised her forehead stamping a smile, but
was surprised to see him crying.

30 With deep bitterness, Adam sought to know the reason that had led him to rebel
against the Eternal. Eva, promptly, began to tell her the fantastic story of the wise snake.
Satan knew that snake story would never convince man to eat the fruit of the forbidden
tree. He needed to find a subtle way to take him to seal his lot by following in his wife’s
footsteps. Having Eva under his power, he resolved to make her the tempting object. I
would wait for the right moment to link it. On the day you eat of him, you will certainly
die. The memory of this sentence left Adam very distressed.

31 The expectation of seeing his beloved dying in his arms was too much to bear. This
affliction, however, was diminishing, seeing that she remained happy and affectionate at
her side, as if no evil had happened to her. Relieved, Adam smiled again, corresponding
to the affections of his companion. He surrendered to the sweetest emotions, far from
knowing that it was the enemy who wrapped him in those hugs. At that moment of
enchantment, Eva began talking about her experience with the science of good and evil.

32 He told him about the treasures of wisdom that had been opened to him. In his new
kingdom, he would live very happy. However, that happiness would be incomplete
without the participation of her husband. He told her about the impossibility of going
back in his steps, and insisted that he follow her. After telling her about his decision, Eva,
with a sweet smile, extended her hands containing a fruit, asking him to eat it in a
demonstration of his love for her. With the tempting voice in his ears, Adam sat on the
grass in deep thought.

33 His face turned pale again and his hands trembling. He was afraid to rebel against the
Creator, but at the same time he understood that he would not be able to live apart from
his companion, whom he loved with infinite love. Eve was the flesh of her flesh, the
extension of her being. He felt distressed having to make such a serious decision. The
paleness of Adam’s face was reflected in the countenance of all the faithful to the
Eternal. They heard the insinuation of the enemy and perceived with horror the
hesitation of man. Adam’s indecision left them desperate.

34 If he obeyed Satan’s proposal, all happiness would be eternally banished. In the
decisions of the human being was the destiny of the entire Universe. Would he attend to
Satan’s request? After intense internal struggle, Adam looked at his companion; She had
joined in promises of eternal surrender. I wouldn’t leave her alone now. He would share
with her the results of the rebellion. He then took a fruit from Eve’s hand and, in a rash
gesture, brought it to his mouth.

35 Seeking to extinguish the voice of his conscience, which spoke of an eternal
destruction, Adam threw himself into his wife’s arms, enjoying the high price of his
rebellion. Satan, with cries of triumph, left paradise, flying quickly with his innumerable
hosts, who anxiously awaited the result of such a risky attempt. Upon learning of human
misfortune, they joined in a thunderous party. They felt safe. Zion now belonged to them
by right, being able there to establish an eternal kingdom, never being bothered by the
laws of the Eternal.

36 Throughout the Universe the children of light suffered and cried defeat. There has
never been so much sadness and horror about the future. The voices that lived to sing
praises to the Creator would now utter lamentations. The Eternal, who, overcome by
infinite pain, had prostrated himself in tears at the fall of man, was not, however,
surprised. Even before creating the Universe he had already foreseen that triumph of
rebellion and, in His wisdom and love, had idealized a rescue plan that would involve him
in an immense sacrifice.

37 Drying the tears of His crying, He set out to act mightily in favor of His afflicted
faithful, preventing them from falling into the hands of the enemies. In that mysterious
intervention that apparently deposed against justice, the Eternal ordered His most
powerful angels to immediately circumvent the garden of Eden, preventing Satan from
taking possession of Mount Zion. Consoled before the divine manifestation, the powerful
creatures, in prompt obedience, broke the infinite space, instantly surrounding paradise,
in which the human being, already upset by sin, lived the blackness of a night that would
be long and cruel.

38 Being the authority of the Eternal based on justice, how could he justify His actions
before the enemies? Had he not delivered the kingdom to man by His will, and he had
not submitted it to Satan by free choice? While surprised the rational creatures
considered the decisive actions of GOD, they heard His powerful voice that,
reverberating throughout the creation, brought the revelation of the great mystery –
revelation so wonderful that from that moment, for all eternity, it would occupy the mind
of the faithful, being the subject for the sweetest meditations. –

39 The Eternal spoke first about the terrible condemnation that hung over man and all
creation. He said that by detaching himself from the Source of Life, man had plunged
into such a deep abyss that he could not be reached by His arm of justice and power.
Humiliated and tortured by the claws of the enemy, there was no other man left beyond
death — painful fruit of his spontaneous rebellion. – Considering the human situation, the
hosts of light saw no chance of triumph. They knew that only man could resume the
enemy’s dominance, returning it to the Creator.

40 But the human being, eternally enslaved in his nature, would be incapable of such
victory. In a melodious voice and full of tenderness, GOD revealed the plan of
redemption, saying: “Truly, man will reap the fruit of his rebellion in a terrible death. I
cannot, with my power, change his luck. If he acted like this, it would be unfair before my
decree, but I will bring down all the condemnation on a Substitute that will arise in
human descent, that Man will not bring into his hands the rings of death, being innocent
and uncontaminated in His nature.
41 As a representative of the human race, he will face Satan and overcome him. After
triumphing in that battle, proving that love is stronger than selfishness, that truth is
stronger than lies, that humility is more powerful than pride, the faithful Substitute will
raise victorious hands not to greet the great conquers, but to take the cup of their
condemnation from the hands of enslaved humanity. He will soak, submissively, the
chalice of eternal death.

42 That immense sacrifice will open to humans an opportunity to be redeemed, returning
to the arms of the Creator, together with the lost dominion. “The hosts, surprised at the
revelation of the Eternal, inquired into the identity of That Substitute. The Creator, with a
loving smile, he told them: “I will be that Man. My Spirit will rest on a virgin, and in her a
Holy Son will be begotten. That young man will be divine and human. In his humanity, he
will be submissive to the divinity that will dwell in Him. The redeemed will see in Him the
Father of Eternity, the Creator and Redeemer, the King of kings. His name will be Yoshua
(Hebrew name that translated means the Eternal Savior.) “Assuming human nature, GOD
could pay the high price of ransom, dying instead of sinners.

43 The hosts of light fell silent upon knowing the plan of the Creator. The thought of
seeing Him submit to such a painful sacrifice, in order to redeem the lost dominion, was
too much to bear. There was, however, no other hope of victory, except through that
loving surrender. After enjoying the high price of sin, the young couple felt bad. Initially
they felt a great emptiness in the heart, which was then filled by remorse and sadness.
They perceived that, inspired by greed, they had sealed their sad luck and that of all
creation. They seemed to hear in the distance the groan of a defeated Universe.

44 The sun, which had filled them with life and heat on that day, was hiding on the
horizon, announcing a black night. The tree, which had previously announced the happy
encounter with the Creator, seemed to involve them in a sentence that they would never
wake up to a new day. They dared not even look towards the top, afraid to see the ray of
judgment fall on them that would reduce them to dust. With his eyes directed to the cold
ground, the sentence came to mind: “On the day you eat of him, you will surely die.”
Desperate tears rolled down their faces as they awaited the tragic end. When
considering the reason for his rebellion, Adam began to recriminate his wife for having
given ears to the snake.

45 Eve, in turn, seeking to excuse herself, threw guilt on the Creator, saying: “Why did
the Eternal allow the snake to deceive me ?!” The love that reigned in the human heart
disappeared, giving rise to pride and selfishness, which melted into resentment and
hatred. His nature was no longer pure and holy, but corrupted and full of rebellion.
Everything was changed. Even the gentle breeze that had previously bathed them in
refreshing caresses, now froze the guilty couple.

46 The trees and flowery quarries, which were his delight, now consisted of obstacles
when walking aimlessly on that night. Satan’s purpose in filling the Sabbath of darkness
seemed to have been fulfilled. On that night, there was not even the silver reflection of
the moonlight to tell them of hope. The twinkling stars, suspended in the dark sky, were
obfuscated by pain. The darkness of a long night of sin descended upon the world —
shadows under which so many would crawl without the hope of a dawn. – It was high
night already and the darkness seemed to wrap the sad couple in eternal shadows.

47 They didn’t even meditate on their few words, suffocated by the agony, of a dawn.
Cabizbajos, groped from here to there, in the expectation of impending judgment, which
would reduce them to the cold dust, forgotten under those endless darkness. Suddenly a
glow appeared in the sky, which was increasing as it approached the earth. The couple
shuddered, because they knew it was the Creator who came to give them the
punishment. Overcome by panic, they ran, distancing themselves from Mount Zion, the
place of shameful fall. Just there they saw the Creator go. They, who always ran to meet
the loving Father, attracted by His light, now fled desperately in search of dark places,
and dense forest.

48 The Eternal, moved by infinite love, began to follow in the footsteps of the fugitive
couple. As he walked, he cried when he remembered the happy moments he had spent
with them in that paradise. How everything had transformed! His children could no
longer see in Him a Father of love, but someone who, angry, sought to punish them.
Moved by a strong yearning to embrace His human children, GOD made the voice
reverberate in an inquiry: "Adam, where are you?” His voice, sounding in the darkness,
brought only an empty echo that spoke of ingratitude and rebellion.

49 As he wished to wrap the couple in an ardent embrace, and with words of affection
confess that His love was the same! Seeing His children fleeing His presence, the Eternal
was overwhelmed with great pain. Before His troubled look of tears, the future of the
human race stretched. How many, deceived by Satan, would flee His presence during the
long night of sin, judging in Him a tyrant Lord, who lives looking for faults and
weaknesses in sinners, in order to punish them! The Creator, however, would not give up
looking for them through the shady valleys of the kingdom of death, until they
conquered a repentant people. Adam and Eve, exhausted by the hurried escape, hid
through the foliage at the foot of a fig tree.

50 Recognizing their nakedness, they tried to make aprons by sewing those sheets.
Dressed like this, they thought they could get rid of the feeling of shame before the
Creator. The Eternal, approaching the place where the couple was hiding, asked: - Adam,
where are you? – Unable to hide more from GOD, Adam rose together with his companion
and, crestfallen, appeared before the creator, prostrating at his feet. They failed to face
him anymore, due to the feeling of guilt.

51 The Creator, affectionately, took them by the hands, lifting them from the ground,
and, with an expression of sadness on the countenance, asked them: - Why did they flee
from me? Did they eat the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil? – Adam, all
trembling, in a voice broken by sobs of fear, replied: - The woman you gave me as a
companion, she gave me the fruit and I ate. – With this answer, Adam sought to excuse
himself, throwing the blame on his wife.

52 Turning to Eva, the Eternal asked him: “Why did you do that?” Eva promptly replied:
“That snake deceived me and I ate.” – Both did not want to acknowledge the blame,
throwing it on others. Simply put, they attributed responsibility to the Creator for all the
wrongdoing: “Why had he granted them free will? Why had he created the woman? Why
had he created the snake?” Silent, GOD watched His children who, shy and bewildered,
stood before Him.

53 With deep sadness, He foresaw that this would be the experience of countless human
beings in the course of history. How many would be lost for not recognizing one’s own
fault! How many would try to justify themselves, throwing their mistakes on others and
even on the Creator himself! With soft words, the Eternal tried to make them
acknowledge their guilt. Only by recognizing their need, could they be helped. Looking at
the fragile garments woven by sinful hands, he said to the couple, “Children, those
garments are insufficient, immediately drying up they will fall apart.” You need lasting
garments that can cover your nakedness, freeing you from condemnation. If you would
like, I can give you that garment. –

54 In the face of the Creator’s kind words, which brought hope, the couple prostrated
themselves repentantly, detaching themselves from their illusory garments, symbols of
their failure. They now longed for the garments of salvation, promised by the divine
Father.



CHAPTER 5



(GOD reveals the effects of the fall and the Plan of Redemption. The painful sacrifice of
the lamb, a symbol of the Savior. The promised garments are provided. The Creator will
be the Man who will save them. In the couple intensifies the love and gratitude towards
the Savior, the shudder of the evil hosts before the intervention of the Eternal and the
revelation of the Rescue Plan The Eternal accompanies the couple outside the garden
Satan tries again to seize the human being facing them with fury, but is repelled by GOD,
and their silenced threats Bad consequences of the science of good and evil The faith of
man in the revealed truths of redemption The Eternal, companion of the human being in
his journey on the earth Nature of the Creator with respect to war. Uplifting work
counterattacks many attacks from Satan Revelations received when building the altar
Two worlds reflected in fallen nature An immaculate lamb guided and prepared by Di In
the sacrifice a representa”Ion of the conflict between good and evil is shown. Th”
burning flame, symbol of divine forgiveness. Nature, even in its fallen state, reveals the
Plan of Redemption. )

   1. After contemplating His children who, repentant, lay at His feet, the Eternal took
      them affectionately by the hands and lifted them. He was glad to reveal to the
      fallen man the plan of redemption. With tenderness, GOD began to discover to
      them first the bitter results of his fall, saying: “Children, you sealed the destiny of
      all creation in the grip of death. Disharmony already penetrates nature, trying to
      destroy in it all the virtues.
2 The abyss in which you immersed yourself in disobedience is also deep so that you can
be reached by my powerful arm. Thus, detached from the Source of Life, there is no
other human being left beyond death. “After uttering these words that revealed a sad
fate, the Eternal invited the couple to follow him. Cabizbajos, Adam and Eve , in tears,
they followed the Creator in His steps of justice, which led them to the place of the
shameful fall, where they supposed to find the painful end.

3 On that painful walk, they sobbed when they remembered their past of glory undone
by ingratitude. How the terrible expectation of being reduced, along with the creation, to
cold ashes under the darkness of that night of sin hurt in their soul! As they walked, they
contemplated through the tears the numb beauty bathed in the light of GOD. They saw
the innocent animals, who were not aware of the great pain. Suddenly, the couple
stopped, overcome by intense crying; his faltering steps had led them to a lamb, the
dearest animal.

4 Would your eyes of sweetness also go out ?! Drying their tears, the Eternal ordered
them to take the innocent lamb in their arms. Wrapping it next to his chest, they silently
accompanied the steps of the Creator, until they reached the top of Mount Zion, place of
the shameful fall. Contemplating the remains of the fruit there, with impetus the memory
of the divine judgment came to mind: “On the day you eat of it, you will surely die.” The
terrible moment had arrived. The guilty man should drink the bitter chalice of death,
succumbing hopelessly.

5 Aware of their downfall, the couple perceived, in horror, that the hands they had
brought to life now held a pointed stone knife. Trembling, they prostrated themselves
and waited for compliance with the just sentence. While silenced by fear, Adam and Eve
waited for the blow that would reduce them to dust, they felt the soft touch of the divine
hands that lifted them into a new life. The condemnation, however, would fall on a
substitute.

6 Placing the knife in Adam’s hands, the Creator said to him: “The lamb will die instead
of you.” – Adam should sacrifice it. Frightened at the command of GOD, the couple,
crying, began to cry: - Lord, the little lamb is not innocent! – With an expression of
justice, the Eternal added: - If he does not die, you can not have the clothes of which I
spoke. – At the insistence of the Creator, Adam, all trembling, in a painful effort, stuck
that sharp stone in the little lamb’s chest. The blow was fatal, and the little animal,
shedding its precious blood, plunged into the darkness of an endless night.

7 Contemplating the inert lamb on the bloody grass, the couple raised their voices and
wept. They were beginning to understand the enormity of their tragedy. How terrible was
death! She, in his possession, had turned off all the light in the eyes of the innocent
animal. Leaning silently on the inert body of the lamb, the Eternal removed the skin
covered with white wool and with it made robes to cover the nakedness of the couple.
After dressing them he asked them with affection: - Did you understand the meaning of
all this? – In deep reflection, through sobs of recognition and gratitude, the couple
exclaimed: - He died in our place, to give us his clothes! –
8 Adam and Eve, although they had understood that physical reality, were far from
understanding the meaning of that event. To them the Creator would reveal the mystery
of divine love. With an expression of infinite mercy, GOD began to reveal to the human
being the meaning of that painful sacrifice, saying: The innocent little lamb, which today
suffered, symbolizes a man to be born. In his eyes there will be the same tenderness, the
same love. Coated for a just life, like the white wool that covered the lamb, that man will
grow like a renewal on Earth, not holding the bonds of sin in his hands. In his
appearance, that man will not bring the pomp of a king, so he will be despised by many.

9 He will be a man of pain, for the weight of all provocations will fall upon him. In his
faithfulness to the kingdom of light, that man will fight the usurper enemy, finally
defeating him. After triumphing in his struggles, he will take upon himself the burden of
your condemnation that will cause him a terrible death. He will be pierced because of
your rebellion and crushed by your iniquities. He will be oppressed and humiliated, but
he will not open his mouth, like the little lamb that today gave himself peacefully.
Succumbing in death, he will grant you the merits of his victory. Wrapped in their
garments of justice, you will be free from condemnation.

10 Eternal life you will achieve in this way, by the sacrifice of that righteous man who will
be born. Adam and Eve, who in a mixture of gratitude and pain heard the revelation of
such a great salvation, inquired reverently about that special man who in his offspring
would have to arise, in order to fulfill such an immense sacrifice. The Creator, looking at
them tenderly, moved by a love that overcomes the same death, enveloped them in an
affectionate embrace and revealed: - I will be that Man! – Surprised at the declaration of
the Eternal, Adam and Eve were motionless, while contemplating His Tender
countenance.

11 Understanding the meaning of the tremendous sacrifice, they prostrated themselves
at His feet and with tears cried out: - We are deserving of death Lord, but You are
innocent and must not suffer in our place! – Wiping away the tears, the Eternal with
tenderness He spoke: “My children, I love you with an eternal love." I will die instead of
you. – Given this confirmation, the couple raised their voice in a painful lamentation.
They said: - We kill the Creator! We kill the Creator! ”But GOD began to comfort the
couple with words of hope, saying:“ After drinking the chalice of eternal death, I will
resume life and go up to heaven.

12 I will intercede there for the lost man, granting to all those who, repentant, accept my
sacrifice, the garments of my victory. Together, we will finally triumph over the kingdom
of sin that will fall into ashes under our feet. I will then create a new Heaven and a new
Earth, where only justice and love will reign. We will live like this forever, in a kingdom of
perfect harmony and peace. – The Creator, who accompanied by the couple was still on
Mount Zion, concluded His revelations by saying:

13 “The garden of Eden will now be empty. The human being, during the long night of
sin, will wander in his exile. He will not walk, however, alone: the Eternal, also a pilgrim,
will tread with man all the thorny path, until being able to climb up the lost mountain
together, triumphantly triumphing over the kingdom of death.The tree of the science of
good and evil monument of rebellion will then be undone, giving rise to a glorious tree
that, joining its crown to the tree of life , it will become the memorial arch of the great
victory. On the holy mountain redeemed, then the universal throne will rest forever,
which by the triumphant faithful will be called: the throne of GOD and the Lamb. “

14 Adam and his companion, after hearing such comforting and hopeful words, raised
their voices in a song of gratitude and praise. They now knew the infinite love of their
Creator and were willing to serve it. After comforting the couple, GOD led them out of
Eden. It was not easy for them to say goodbye to that beautiful home; there they had
awakened to life in the arms of the Eternal; there they enjoyed moments of pure
happiness, in the company of the Creator, the angels and the docile animals. An infinite
nostalgia seemed to involve the couple in their abandonment steps. It was with horror
that Satan and his subjects witnessed the intervention of the Eternal.

15 They were shaken at the surprising revelation of the rescue plan. With rabid
frustration, they understood that, if indeed the divine promise was fulfilled, there would
be no hope. After considering everything that had happened, great anger took hold of his
heart. He was not willing to recognize the redemption of the human being. He would
make every effort to retain him, together with the kingdom that had been delivered to
him. When the couple, accompanied by the Creator, reached the valley wounded by
death, it dawned. There Satan confronted them with fury, in an attempt to seize the
human being again.

16 The couple was trembling on the face of the enemy, but GOD’s protective hands
calmed them. Expressing in the countenance the firmness of a justice that is eternal, the
Eternal silenced the threats of the enemy with the following words: "The human being
belongs to me, because I bought it with my blood.” As they walked silently beside the
Creator, Adam and Eve watched with sadness the signs of death stamped on that nature
before so full of life. The beautiful flowers, which had unbuttoned to exhale eternal
aromas, now hung withered; The little birds, who happily greeted them at each dawn
with their trills, now flew distant, sounding such sad songs! Everything was changed in
nature.

17 The science of good and evil had brought no good to the Universe, but an intense
spiritual and physical conflict. Faced with the devastating consequences of his fall, the
couple, defeated by an inexpressible sadness, prostrated themselves and cried bitterly.
GOD, who was also saddened by pain, contemplated the bleak stage, sought, with words
of hope, to comfort them. He told them about the new Heaven and the new Earth that
one day would create, where peace and love would reign in each heart. There they would
always live together, not bringing on the forehead the marks of sadness, but crowns of
eternal victory.

18 There he would dry the tears on their faces and they would never wet his eyes again.
Protecting Adam and Eve in their steps, the Creator led them through a wounded valley,
until they reached the foot of a hill. They climbed it in slow steps, while exchanging
words of encouragement and hope. His feet finally reached the soft grass that covered
the spacious top of that hill. It was on that place that the couple saw each day the sun
decline, bathing the sky and valleys a bright red, like the blood that had dripped from the
lamb's chest.

19 Turning to the eastern side, the couple, in a mixture of pain and nostalgia,
contemplated in the distance the landscapes that enveloped them in that happy past.
When they saw Mount Zion, which stood majestically in the middle of Eden, they cried
when they remembered the fall. How weak they had been! The sun was declining in his
day, announcing the arrival of one more sad night – the first out of paradise.— In a calm
gesture, the Eternal, showing them the outstanding valley of the hill, spoke to them with
affection: “Here will be your temporary abode From here you can contemplate the
paradise that for some time will remain on Earth, until it is collected to its place of origin,
within the Celestial Jerusalem.

20 There, protected by justice, await the dawn of victory. When that great day arrives,
we will return together to Zion, where we will be crowned in glory, in a kingdom of
eternal happiness and peace. “After saying these words, GOD commanded the couple to
build an altar of stones there, on the which every week, on the night before Saturday,
they should immolate a lamb, in memory of His Sacrifice.

21 As a sign of His presence, and for the certainty that his sins would be forgiven, He
would light a fire on the altar, which would last all night, until he completely consumed
the sacrifice offering. For the human being to be able to affirm his faith about the
revealed truths, and not in the visible manifestation of the person of the Creator, He
would remain invisible from that moment onwards. Only on special occasions, when His
appearance or that of angels became necessary for new revelations and warnings, would
this occur. Contemplating His children saddened at that moment when they would be left
apparently alone.

22 The Eternal said to them with love: “Children, even if you have to remain in this
hostile environment, you do not need to fear, for I will remain by your side. I will be a
fellow friend on this journey; I will carry your pains on your shoulders, your desires. , your
struggles. When, tempted by the enemy, they were about to give in, they will be able to
find shelter in my arms, which will always be extended to save them and, if one day you
will not resist, and by the fury of the enemy you will be dragged into the depths from the
abyss, do not despair, believing you have no hope, for I will be there to meet you with
my forgiveness and strength.

23 Always keep in mind the meaning of the garments received from my hands, for they
speak of the redemption that man belongs to. Rest my children, in my arms of love.
“After comforting the couple with these promises, the Creator, seeing that they were
sleepy by fatigue, made them rest in His lap and, as usual, gently caressed them to
numb them. Seeing them forgotten in their sleep, GOD wept as they foresaw the
suffering they would experience upon awakening.With their hearts broken by the pain
caused by that physical separation, the Creator left the couple asleep on the grass, after
kissing the faces already marked by the suffering.
24 His light dissipated by becoming invisible, giving rise to the darkness of that first
night out of paradise. In the subconscious of the couple began to parade colorful dreams
of a happy past. The beauties of Eden were once again in the middle, filled with eternal
joy. Grateful for life, they ran through the flowery fields, playing with animals. Happily
joined the voices to the angels in the harmonious songs in praise of the Creator. So many
beautiful scenes paraded in his subconscious, but those dreams became nightmares,
making them relive their tragedy.

25 Agonizers woke up in the darkness of that first night in exile. Failing to fall asleep, the
couple remained in tears until they were comforted by the dawn that revealed to them in
the distance the nostalgic paradise. GOD, although invisible, remained next to Adam and
Eve there on the hill. Their suffering was His suffering, as well as the hope that one day
they would return victorious to Zion. Before the contemplative gaze of the Creator, the
bleak future of humanity was revealed. With regret, I saw countless creatures perishing
without salvation, for rejecting His love. Tears wet His face, foreseeing the enemy using
all cunning in order to retain human beings under his domain.

26 Long would be the night of sin, and the battle for the reconquest of the lost kingdom
was at odds. The triumph of the light would require from GOD an immense sacrifice. In
the person of the Messiah, in his time, he would be born among men, with the mission of
paying the ransom price. Through Him many would be freed from the claws of the
enemy: all those who accepted Him as Savior and King. Against those chosen, the enemy
would attack all the forces trying to make them fall. In his vision of the future, the
Creator contemplated with joy the final triumph of the redeemed.

27 They had been extremely tested, but in everything they were more than conquerors
through Him who redeemed them from darkness into the kingdom of light. After
anticipating the sufferings that would result from the great struggle, the Eternal
extended his gaze across the captive plains, contemplating there the rebel hosts willing
to fight. The aim of these armies was to seize the human being again, in which the right
of dominion over the Universe was sealed. Contrary to the nature of the Creator is war,
but for the defense of His children, he was willing to use His power.

28 His strength, however, would only be used fairly. If the human being rejected that
protection offered by the sacrifice of the Messiah, GOD could do nothing to prevent
himself from perishing in the grip of the enemy. Adam and Eve, however, had repented
of their great sin, receiving by the mercy of GOD garments of salvation, symbolized by
the skins of the sacrificed lamb. Justified by the delivery of the couple, the Eternal
summoned His powerful armies for the fight. In prompt obedience the hosts of light
stormed the outer space in the direction of the Earth, surrounding which strong wall the
hill, bearer of that treasure redeemed by the blood of the divine King.

29 The human being was given a duty in Eden to take care of nature: they prepared
quarries for flowers; they reaped fruits for support; They directed the animals in their
innocent life, training them to be useful. These occupations had been for them sources of
development and pleasure. Now, despite the adversities, they should continue to
perform that duty. The work itself, carried out according to the Creator’s orders, would
already cancel out many enemy attacks. The couple’s first occupations on that morning
brought revelations of GOD’s great love, hitherto unknown.

30 As they gathered the stones for the construction of the altar, they experienced the
pain of wounds that dripped blood, as well as the fatigue that caused sweat to emanate.
Feeling and contemplating everything in their own flesh, they loved the Savior more, for
whom the built altar foreshadowed greater wounds, which would shed all His blood, as
well as fatigue that would undermine all the sage of His life. The look of nostalgia and
hope of the couple from now on would never perch on distant Eden, without first
discerning the altar of sacrifice.

31 That altar, with its stains of sweat and blood, would remain as a remembrance of pain
and suffering that, after moistening the lips of human beings, would transship into the
Creator's cup. After contemplating for a long time the paradise of eternal life that
extended far beyond that dark altar of death, the couple experienced the sweet relief of
rest. Eager to know the landscapes of their new home, Adam and Eve, encouraged by
hope, went for a walk.

32 Their steps led them along the paths of smiles and tears; of charms and
disappointments; of delicate flowers unbuttoned, bathed in perfume, and of flowers,
lying withered and odorless; of still docile and submissive animals and of enemy, fierce
and menacing animals. The couple discerned in their walk the currencies of two worlds:
that of light and that of darkness; of love and selfishness; of hope and despair; of
harmony and disharmony; of life and death. That vision filled them with sadness and
they cried long. That sadness would increase even more in the future, when they
discovered the depth of those currencies within their offspring.

33 Six trees had already colored the skies announcing to the couple the dark and cold
nights that with their cloak of darkness undid all the living images, except the hope of
seeing them colorful again in the dawn of light. The hour of sacrifice was approaching,
when the rude altar, scorched in his justice would cry for blood. If they did not offer the
offering, it would explode with certainty, wrapping the whole world with its flames; There
would be no dawn then, no hope of Eden to flourish.

34 How precious is the blood! Blood is life; life is light! For a being that night would
become eternal, without dawn! That being should take the blame of everyone, giving his
blood to the rude altar. Who would offer? Who would pour the sage of life, until he saw
the last flash go out in his sky ?! Adam and Eve after reflecting for a long time,
contemplating the cradle of death built by their hands, looked at each other restlessly
with that decisive question: Who will offer? That inquiry, born of his guilt, made the voice
of the blessed Creator vibrate deep within his remembrances in His revelation of infinite
goodness: - “I love you with an eternal love; I will die in your place “. –

35 Grateful, the couple bowed reverently before the thirsty altar, seeing it by faith,
satiated by the gift of eternal love. On that afternoon of the sixth day, GOD subjected the
human being to a tremendous test of faith. They had before them the altar of stones,
built according to the divine order, but there was no sheep for the sacrifice. In their
yearning, they remembered Eden, where there were many flocks. When they saw the
sun fall on the horizon, Adam and Eve began to cry out to GOD for help, because they
knew that only a miracle could provide them, at that last moment, a lamb for sacrifice.

36 In the eyes of the inhabitants of the Universe, the great miracle for which the human
being cried out, was already processed for almost a week: Guided by the Creator, an
immaculate lamb had left Eden and followed the couple’s traces in their walk to exile. In
his long day, that little animal had to face many challenges and dangers, more protected
and guided by the Eternal he continued in his mission. When the shadows of the dusk
began to wrap the hill, the couple who lived such a hard test of faith, discerned a little
white dot that jumped on the grass coming towards them. As he approached, that lump
seemed to speak of hope, of life and heat.

37 Seeing that the great miracle had happened, they ran to meet the lamb, wrapping it
in his arms. He was tired, but he would not rest: he would rest. He was thirsty, but he
would not drink: he would drink the altar that cried out for blood. That lamb had the will
to live in the arms of man, but he would die, so that he could live in the arms of GOD. It
was a perfect symbolism of the Redeemer who would leave His glory, coming in search
of the sinner. The darkness of one more prefigurative night slowly descended, enveloping
all nature in his prison.

38 His strength, however, would be struck down before the human being, by the
brightness of a special fire, ignited by the hands of divine forgiveness upon the lifeless
body of the innocent lamb. Everything was prepared for the painful blow: an act that
would extinguish from those sweet eyes the last flash of life, immersing them in the cold
darkness of an eternal night: darkness that would generate light; cold that would
generate heat; death that would generate life – undeserved gifts; - fruits of divine love
offered to sinful hands, ready to hurt. In the middle of the silent night the altar cries out;
The sad man exclaims, while the mute lamb does not claim to be extended for death.
The hands that built the altar rise now, not to caress as before, but to hurt, bleeding the
price of forgiveness.

39 Just a gesture, nothing more, and the flash will go out forever from innocent eyes,
making the light of salvation shine on the guilty face. Adam, trembling doubt in
compassion. In the meek and submissive lamb, ready to die instead, go to the promised
Savior. With a regretful heart, in a painful effort, he digs the stone knife into the chest of
the animal that perishes in his hands without even giving a groan. The power of the night
is immediately struck down by the brightness of the fire of acceptance. Its light reveals
to the human being its tragic condition: Seeing the hands stained by innocent blood, the
couple feels guilty for that death.

40 In tears they kneel before the altar that no longer demands blood from them, but
offers light, accepting the unmerited forgiveness. Rising, the couple contemplates the
poorly wounded body of the poor little lamb, unable to thank him for the wealth granted
in exchange for his so rough blow. Bathed in the soft light of sacrifice, Adam and his
companion remain silent to meditate, until they are overcome by a deep sleep. Reclining
on the ground covered with soft grass, they gently fall asleep under the warm rays of
forgiveness, certain that their brightness and heat would last until they were the
darkness of that Saturday completely vanished by the shining sun.

41 The light of the lamb, since it was lit on the altar that night, remained in constant war
with darkness. On several occasions it grew in brightness, chasing away the cold
darkness in the distance, bathing nature with its rays of life. Sometimes, the darkness
bringing its cold wind almost completely tore the flame. This, however, in a great effort
fed on the blood of the lamb, throwing its burning flame high, flooding everything around
it with light and heat.

42 The conflict between the light born of sacrifice and darkness on that night, discovered
to the faithful of the Universe many important lessons – truths that would occupy their
minds for all eternity. – In that flame, whether it was burning in its brightness, whether it
was whipped by the winds of the night, the faithful saw a representation of the millennial
conflict between good and evil; conflict that truce would extend until the eternal dawn.
The Eternal, in pledge of His future sacrifice, had lit in the midst of darkness, the light of
truth, and that would be kept burning in the heart of the human being, by virtue of His
blood that would be shed for remission of guilt.

43 Against that light, the enemy would lash out all the cold winds of evil, banishing its
sweet glow from the hearts of many. How many would be lost by rejecting the light of
divine forgiveness, being enveloped by the darkness of the dark night! After long hours
of combat, the signs of dawn arise in the sky. The darkness that with anger had thrown
its winds over the flame that does not die trying to banish it, becomes confused at the
signs of dawn. The sky dyed a bright red, reminds us of the blood that had sprouted from
the breast of the lamb so that the flame of forgiveness could illuminate human night.

44 In the midst of the colorful of blood, the shining sun rises on the horizon, bringing in
its warm rays the taste of victory, enveloping everything with its life. The dawn in his
nostalgic affection, caresses the distant paradise, taking from his beloved bosom in his
morning breeze the scent of nostalgia, in a message of comfort and hope for the
suffering creatures of the valley of death. Bathed in the warm rays and the breeze of
hope, the couple awakens on another Saturday, whose symbolism points to rest in the
kingdom of GOD, at the end of the great conflict between light and darkness.

45 Beyond that altar covered with ashes, Adam and Eve contemplate the nostalgic
paradise. Although distant in their exile, they rejoice with the certainty that the sacrifice
of the Messiah will scratch for them on Saturday of Saturdays: that of tears forever
banished; from sun always to shine in a clear sky; from lambs always alive to play on the
grass; day without dusk, when there will be no more altar covered with blood and ashes.
They sigh for that day of glory, when GOD will become eternally visible, holding in their
hands the marks of His infinite love for His children.

46 Before the fall, the human being, as well as all the heavenly hosts, learned at the feet
of the Creator who patiently taught them the treasures of wisdom contained in the vast
compendium of nature. Everything in the Universe, from the tiny atom to the largest of
the worlds, testified in its perfect existence of the character of the divine King. Many
teachings, however, remained hidden in the pages of that great book in the period that
preceded the fall: They were like the stars that, hidden during the day, reveal their
brightness as the shadows of the night come down.

47 Having captive nature, the enemy, in an attempt to block the revelation of Eternal
wisdom, introduced in it spots of selfishness, destruction, unhappiness and death. I did
not know that these spots would show in the face of creation the depth of GOD’s justice
and love, leading the faithful to love and revere him even more. For the couple, as well
as for all the children of light, the wounded nature broke their veil, revealing new aspects
of the Creator’s goodness hidden until then.

48 Adam and Eve who were accustomed to the eternal flowers in paradise, those who did
not see them unbuttoned, now saw them emerge in tender buttons, amid the threats of
thorns ready to hurt them. These tender flowers, regardless of being with the thorns,
exhaled soft perfumes of praise and gratitude, never getting tired of pleasing the
environment. When whipped by the cold winds of the night, those flowers did not resent,
but offered their scent, which transformed the fury of the winds into scented breezes of a
dawn.

49 Moved by deep gratitude, the couple closely accompanied the ministry of love of
those flowers that they never tired of blessing, offering their beauty and perfume as
relief for those who were hurt by the harsh thorns. Those singular and pure flowers, after
showing in their short life that forgiveness and love are stronger than all winds and
thorns, in a last effort to communicate joy, exhaled their perfume, falling withered and
lifeless on the cold ground . There, forgotten, they became insignificant dust that was
dispersed by the wind.

50 The death of the flowers, although it seemed to be a failure, revealed to the couple
the mystery of the rebirth of life: By dying, the flowers gave life to the fruits that, in turn,
after serving as food, donated their seeds full of life . In the death of these seeds, the
miracle of life was reborn, multiplying the trees with their flowers ready to repeat the
teaching of love and sacrifice. Nature, therefore, even stained by sin, revealed the
hidden mystery of the plan of redemption. Each flower to unbutton in the middle of the
thorns, in its short life of love, was a symbol of the Savior that would be born among the
thorns of evil, to comfort the perfume of the heart of the afflicted.

51 Similar to the flower, the Messiah after proving that love and forgiveness are stronger
than all winds of hate; that the truth and justice of the kingdom of GOD are greater than
all the deceptions and injustices of the kingdom of the enemy, would shed the sage of
his life, dying to redeem the guilty.




CHAPTER 6
(Adam and Eve dedicated to edifying work. The hill became a miniature of Eden.
Protection and divine care. Experiences in obeying the commandment on sacrifice. The
cunning trap of the enemy, looking at the symbols of sacrifice as bearers of forgiveness
and life Adam and Eve offer sacrifices to the Lord, the Eternal manifests them by
consoling them and preventing them from danger Promise of the birth of their firstborn
Responsibilities towards their son Birth of Cain Birth of Cain reminds them of the promise
of the future birth of the Messiah The rebellious childhood of Cain The enemy mocks the
suffering of GOD and His faithful and tries to make GOD give up his plan of redemption
The Eternal affirms His solemn promise Adam and Eve make sacrifices and pray for their
son, the Eternal The Eternal reveals himself to Cain and tells him the story of Lucifer and
the Sun. Promise of the birth of Abel. Cain, like Lucifer, is dragged by r his pride to a false
illusion. GOD would seek all forms in order to save Cain)

1 Consoled by the revelations of nature, Adam and his companion, students in the school
of suffering, learned each day to love the Savior more. They grew in wisdom, humility
and holiness. All the virtues destroyed by sin were reborn in the heart. With enthusiasm,
the couple dedicated themselves to edifying work: they planted gardens that, by the
power of GOD, were filled with scented flowers and delicious fruits. His home in exile
became a refuge for the persecuted animals of the valleys. The hill, under the protection
of the angels of light, became a miniature of distant Eden. Among the animals gathered
and tamed with love, there were many sheep.

2 Adam and Eve could not put their eyes on those docile animals destined for sacrifice,
without tasting a mixture of pain and gratitude deep within the soul. on the night before
each Sabbath, Adam had, by order of the Creator, repeating the painful act. How much
bitterness and regret came over the couple as the darkness of the night of sacrifice
descended! How much comfort the flame of forgiveness brought to them that had never
ceased to shine on the altar, on those pre-figurative nights! The decisive value of the
sacrifice, so that life could flourish under divine protection, led the couple to immensely
value their little flock.

3 Every sixth day, however, he began to bring with him, beyond pain, a restlessness: -
Who will donate his blood to the altar when the last sheep perishes? – In the eyes of the
marveled couple, the miracle of the love, renewing the hope of living other weeks under
the brightness of the flame of forgiveness: a sheep, the fattest of them, began to bleed
as if in sacrifice; From their pain, they were born four little lambs. Filled with joy and
gratitude, Adam and Eve prostrated themselves before the invisible Savior, holding in
their hands those new creatures that brought in their eyes the same tenderness and
willingness to sacrifice.

4 Sure that new miracles would multiply their days, the couple united their voice as
before, in a song of gratitude and adoration to the Creator who, like the lambs would also
be born of pain to fulfill in his life the greatest of all sacrifices, for the Salvation of
humanity. The Eternal, although invisible in the eyes of His human children, remained
very close, accompanied by an army of angels, in a tireless ministry of care and
protection. The couple was unaware that the sweet calm and peace reigning on that hill,
as well as all their prosperity, were the fruits of such an intense struggle.

5 If their eyes were open to the scenes that were invisible, they would be snatched away
from horror; How terrible was the enemy and his hosts in their constant vested with the
purpose of ruining the human being, snatching it from the hands of the Creator! Seeing
that the use of force would not result in victory, the enemy in his cunning idealized a trap
with which he could link the couple. Gathering his armies, he revealed his plans by
saying: - “The human being was ordered to sacrifice lambs, as symbols of the coming
Savior.

6 We will tempt you to look at those symbols as bearers of forgiveness and life, gradually
making you forget the reality of the sacrifice promised by GOD. It will be a slow process,
but of a sure victory. "- The Creator, knowing the danger of that trap, was sad, because
when he looked to the future, he could see so many of His children being diverted from
the path of salvation. How many would become attached? To the symbols judging to find
virtue in them! GOD in their love and care, would not leave them unaware of the danger
that threatened them.

7 He knew how much Adam and his companion loved those lambs who, by dying on the
altar, offered them light and heat. They could easily be induced to see them as sources
of life and light, beginning to revere them. Many weeks had passed, bringing with them
the nights of pain and sacrifice, followed by the days of hope and nostalgia of the loving
Father, who after making promises and drying his tears, had become invisible before his
eyes. Each day that passed, he brought the couple a new burden of nostalgia, making
them inquire at each sunset: - When will we kiss His face again? When will we be
wrapped in His arms, walking in the light of His love ?! – How nostalgic they felt of those
Edenic nights, when they fell asleep in the soft lap of their divine Father!

8 One more week of work and lessons learned was ending. The sun in its decline
announced another night of regret and innocent blood to bathe the altar. The silent
couple was far from imagining that on that night, the painful blow that was always
followed by fire would reveal to them the blessed face of the Father. With trembling
hands, Adam lifted the lamb that, mute, made no resistance when placed on the altar.
Tears rolled down his face at the thought that one more innocent animal would dive into
the hated darkness of death, to generate the light with his blood.

9 It is painful to sacrifice, but there is no other way of salvation. Only through the spilled
blood of the lamb can they live to contemplate in the future the face of the Father. In a
painful effort Adam drops that pointed stone on the little lamb that spills his blood in a
groan of pain. A glorious Light soon dissipates the darkness flooding the entire hill with
its rays of life. Through the tears the couple then contemplates the Creator in the fire of
the altar. In a gesture of love, GOD opens His arms as before, and with a smile he walks
towards the long-awaited embrace.

10 Without finding words that express their immense nostalgia, the couple throws
themselves into His chest and cries bitterly. The divine Father, moved, also cries, but
tries to comfort his children, with his sweet smile. With excitement the couple
contemplates the face of the Father, wrapping her with kisses and affection. Their love
for Him had been intensified by suffering. Grateful and happy, they walk beside the
Creator, showing the gardens full of flowers and fruits. They tell you about the lessons
learned with nature; They show him the flock tamed by affection.

11 Illuminated by the soft light of the Eternal Father, the couple sits at His feet as before,
to hear His teachings. The Creator, looking at them with tenderness, goes on to warn
them of danger. Orienting them about the sacrifices of lambs, which were important in
the sense of always keeping in mind the certainty of a coming Savior who, like the
lambs, would be sacrificed for the redemption of sinners. The lambs, however, did not
possess in themselves the power to forgive the faults, for they consisted only of symbols
of the King Messiah.

12 After being aware of the danger of sticking to the symbols seeking to find salvation in
them, the couple received the task of transmitting these orientations to their
descendants. After warning the human being, the Creator looked at the sheep that lay
asleep next to his baby, and exclaimed: - How beautiful are the little lambs! – The
couple, in a mixture of happiness and pain, added: - When they are awake, they jump
with pleasure, forgetting that at birth and death they cause so much pain! –

13 After contemplating the little lambs, GOD looked at the couple tenderly, revealing
something that surprised them and rejoiced: —When these lambs thirty-six have come
up to the altar, your arms will wrap the first child who, as they will also arise from pain.
That child in your childhood will bring you joy by jumping like little lambs in your home.
You must instruct him with dedication in the laws of harmony, showing him the path of
redemption. Like you, he will be free to choose the direction to follow. Accepting the
teaching, your life will be victorious; rejecting it, will walk towards defeat.

14 Adam and Eve heard the divine promise with joy, but at the same time they
experienced in the depths of being a fear of becoming aware of the responsibility they
would have. They knew that Satan would make every effort to bring the promised child
to perdition. It was high night when the Creator, after caressing his children, left them
asleep on the soft grass. After the promise, each little lamb taken to the altar made the
hope of joy that they would soon reach beating stronger in the womb.

15 Thirty-six finally descended into darkness fulfilling the time determined by the Creator
in which the first child would receive the light. With his hands still stained by the blood of
the sacrifice, Adam protected his wife who, at the foot of the altar, fell prostrated by the
pain brought by the first son. The little boy did not bring in the face the joy of freedom,
but the crying of his prison; That crying would last the entire night, if it weren’t for the
glow of that burning flame of hope that soon attracted the attention of his attentive
eyes. Wrapping it with joy, Eve comforted by her suffering, said: “I reached the promise
of the Lord.” He then gave him the name of Cain.

16 After wrapping the baby with the soft skins of a lamb, the couple remained awake to
meditate. Many were the thoughts that occupied their minds: thoughts of joy, gratitude,
hope and longing for the sense of responsibility that now weighed on their shoulders.
Tenderly caressing the little boy, the couple matured in their experience, understanding
better the mysterious love of GOD that, in order to save His children, He set out to die
instead of them.

17 Adam and Eve were not alone in their reflections: all the intelligent beings of the
Universe considered with interest the future of that helpless baby who in the interior
possessed a kingdom of infinite dimensions, when disputed by the two powers in
struggle. Who would be the Lord of his life ?! Would they walk their feet along the
ascending path that leads to life, or the descending path that ends in the abyss of
eternal death ?! Seeing the boy outline his first smile, the couple suddenly remembered
the promise of the Creator that was confirmed in each sacrifice: He would be born of the
woman as a child, with the mission of redeeming humanity.

18 Wouldn’t Cain already fulfill the promise? The infant with his bright eyes of joy
resembled the little lambs that were born and raised with the mission of being sacrificed!
Considering thus, the couple squeezing the son next to the chest began to cry without
comfort. How terrible it would be to offer your innocent son to the rude altar! For the
couple in pain, the bright sun finally appeared, reviving with its warm rays the promises
that pointed to a Savior who, even in the future, would also be born of pain to fulfill the
eternal plan of redemption.

19 Blessed by the Creator and surrounded by the love and care of the parents, the child
developed in his physical and mental nature, becoming every day the main objective of a
tireless battle between the spiritual hosts. Adam and Eve, eager to make him understand
the truths of salvation, took him in the arms at each dawn and, at the edge of the altar,
pointed him to the distant Eden, telling those stories of emotion that little Cain still could
not understand.

20 What was the joy of those parents, seeing him on a sunny morning, pointing his little
hand towards the home of nostalgia, pronouncing the sacred name of the Creator.
Excited they took him in his arms, asking him to repeat that sublime name that, like a
key to happiness, always discovered a paradise of eternal love. All the hosts of the light
bowed with joy upon hearing the little boy pronounce the name of the divine King.

21 The weeks were spent bringing new victims to the altar, and little Cain, the target of
GOD’s attention and care, of the hosts of light and of those tireless loving parents in the
mission to instruct him, grouping his few words , always curious with everything began to
question. The day was declining when the boy, who was lying on his mother’s lap, asked
him: —Mother, why does the sun always go like this, leaving people in the cold of
darkness? – “Eva, surprised, looked at his son, without finding words to answer the
question that brought him the memory of the past of happiness destroyed by his fault.

22 After a moment of silence, kissing the face of little Cain, he said: - “Son, one day the
sun will come to stay, bringing in its rays a world of harmony only; there will no longer be
animals to fight, nor little lambs to die on the altar “- Little Cain, wishing to see that day
scratch soon, said to his mother: -“ Mother, tomorrow the sun will rise in paradise; ask for
him to stay So I can play, play, and never sleep again. “ – Eager to see the day that
would never end, little Cain only fell asleep until after making his mother promise that he
would ask the sun to remain.

23 A new day of radiant sun to walk in the sky emerged for Cain, bringing in his rays joy
and heat. While playing in the garden, his curious eyes turned many times to the sun
that seemed to caress him with a smile of hope. Seeing him, however, walking in the
direction of the west, the little boy ran to his mother, asking him: - “Mother, did he
promise to stay?” – Eva, taking him in her arms, smiled at him trying to make her
understand with simple words, while pointing The distant paradise, the story of
redemption.

24 The sun would come one day to stay. Cain, dissatisfied with the mother’s words,
showed no patience to wait for that day that lay in the distant future. He repeated in
tears: - “I want the sun now, not tomorrow!” – Eva patiently tried to calm her son, talking
about the light of GOD, which can turn night into day. He loved him and could fill his little
heart with brightness, joy and patience. I could thus, wait happily the day of your
dreams. Balancing the head in rejection of the mother’s comfort, Cain pronounced
between sobs: - “I want the sun because I can see it, not the Eternal.” –

25 Like a painful arrow, Cain’s words of rebellion penetrated Eva’s heart, making her cry
bitterly. The faithful throughout the Universe joined that cry. An infinite sadness loomed
over the heart of the rejected Creator. The first steps along the descending path of
rebellion were outlined in Cain’s gestures. How many would follow him to death!
Unaware of the sadness that had fallen over the realm of light, Adam, seeing the sun
decline on the horizon, left his work in the field heading towards the house.

26 He had a song in his heart as he walked toward another encounter with his people. As
he approached the altar, he saw with him his companion prostrated in tears. Little Cain
lay there crying too. Taking him in his arms, Adam asked anxiously: - “What happened
my son?” – Cain sadly replied: - “Mom let the sun go still” – sheltering the son with his
left arm, Adam put his right hand on the Eva’s shoulder, but found no words to comfort
her. The phrase said by his son, seemed to tear his heart, making him relive the fall.
After re-flexing, Adam feeling guilty replied to Cain: - “It was dad who let the sun go still
my son.” –

27 With sobs of great sadness, Adam joined them in tears. The memory of the Savior,
however, comforted him. Drying his tears and those of his little son, he said tenderly: -
“We can rejoice, little son, for GOD promised to make the sun shine forever in the sky; he
will be like the fire that appears on the altar, expelling the darkness of the night”-. With
his eyes turned towards the last clearing of the tree, Cain remained without comfort. In
that evening, there was not as usual a cheerful dinner. The small family, saddened,
remained silent to meditate for long hours, until sleepy they slept under the starlight.

28 The enemy and his hosts, in sarcasm of evil mocked on that night the suffering of
GOD and His faithful. Repeating the words of rebellion of little Cain, he boasted as victor.
In a challenge to the Creator he pronounced: - Look how this my little slave rejects you!
The same will happen with all those who are to be born. I am sure that the right of
domain will never get out of my hands. – All rebel hosts echoed the insults of the
deceiver, humiliating the subjects of light who suffered from the side of the Eternal. With
his insults, the enemy sought to make GOD desist from His plan of redemption. If that
happened, his kingdom of darkness would extend for all eternity, supplanting the
dominion of light.

29 In response to the enemy’s challenge, the Eternal solemnly affirmed: “Even if
everyone rejects me, I will keep the promise. – The Creator could not bear the thought of
seeing little Cain walking towards perdition. Through him he interceded every day,
offering to justice His blood that he would pour. Powerful angels kept him at all times,
frightening the spiritual darkness that stalked him trying to make him insensitive to the
benefits of salvation, which were illustrated by the symbols. Adam and Eve in their
tireless ministry of love, every day they taught Cain the spiritual lessons illustrated in
nature.

30 On every Saturday they tried to affirm in their youthful minds the hope of an eternal
life, which would be the fruit of the Savior’s sacrifice. After living a life without sin, he
would die like a lamb, in order to cast out darkness forever. Cain was sometimes moved
by the teachings, but he almost always questioned hesitantly. He rebelledly asked: - Why
did Samael go to rebel ?! —One night, refusing to hear his parents’ advice, he accused
them of all evil saying: - “If now we don’t have a sun to shine, it is your fault.” –

31 The contemplation of distant Eden bathed in the sun gave birth to thoughts of
adventure in the youthful heart of Cain. He began to think: “This paradise is not as far
away as Dad and Mom affirm. Why wait and suffer so long ?! He is so beautiful! It is from
him that the sun rises every day! If we conquer it , it will be easy to stop the light at its
source; so we will live in a paradise of eternal sun. Cain’s adventure ideas filled Adam
and Eve’s heart with sadness. They saw that their interest was only for the present time;
he dreamed of a paradise of happiness and light conquered by its strength.

32 In his plans, he did not feel the need for a Savior; - Why, if he was so young,
intelligent, full of life and ideals? – So he said. The days of struggles, intercessions and
sacrifices for the destiny of Cain were passed. Precious opportunities to become attached
to the Savior arose every day before him, but he rejected them all, one by one. In his
disbelief he came to doubt the existence of that GOD, which he had never seen. To the
parents who, afflicted but always with patience, tried to free him from the perdition
towards which he was walking, he promised one day, after smiling with disbelief, to
believe in the Creator and His plan of salvation, if the case were to occur. That He
became visible at the time of sacrifice.

33 With burning faith, those parents began to cry out to the Eternal. His visible presence
could, who knows, save that beloved son who became more rebellious every day. The
Creator heard the cry of the afflicted parents. Although he knew that his appearance
would hardly break his rebellious spirit in the heart of young Cain, he was willing to
satisfy the request. He would extend the friendly arms to Cain, trying with love to
conquer his heart.
34 As he knew his longings and dreams of adventure, He could easily identify with him,
captivating him, for He was also Someone who had always carried dreams of adventure
in his chest; Hadn’t the creation of the Universe been a great adventure ?! Hadn’t it been
His dream to see him encrusted with glowing suns, illuminating billions of worlds with his
brightness ?! Wasn’t he also the greatest of His going through the valley of death, in
search of the conquest of distant Eden, forever uniting the sun in his sky ?! They had
many things in common! Cain was curious on that sixth day.

35 On the face of the parents, I saw the encouragement and joy, fruits of a great faith.
Stimulated by that expression of confidence, the young man began to help them in the
preparations for Holy Saturday. The Sun finally slipped away rolling towards the west,
leaving as usual its trace of nostalgia announcing fear. In the darkness, Cain discerned
the white figure of the lamb being lifted to the altar by the hands of the father — that
tireless priest who was always imploring the Creator for the salvation of his beloved son.
–

36 With his hand raised, Adam was preparing for the blow that could, who knows, break
his disbelief in Cain’s heart, giving rise to the belief in salvation in a single moment. The
prayer of faith escapes from his lips: - Eternal Father, hear my request; My son needs
You! Only one look from You can conquer it. Come Lord! – This sincere prayer fell into the
ears of that son touching him. Only the prayer would be enough to convince him of the
real existence of a Savior.

37 While drying the tears of emotion, Cain shudders at the sound of the blow of death.
Everything was solemn at that time; Would the Creator of the world come in response to
the prayer of love ?! How would you face it in disbelief ?! A strong glow soon enveloped
the entire hill also bathing the eastern valley. The wide open eyes of Cain then settled on
the kind eyes of the Creator, which brought a shine above the sun, but not obfuscating.

38 Contemplating him with admiration, Cain exclaimed: “He is young like me, and he
looks like the Sun!” Adam and Eve, moved by the great nostalgia, had the desire to jump
into the Savior’s chest and kiss him, but let Him meet first with Cain With joy, they saw
the precious son wrapped in the arms of the great friend, who looked like his star. After
the long hug, GOD hugged and kissed also the dear couple, partners in suffering. With
joy, they went for a walk in the hill gardens.

39 The Creator and Cain went to the center, and Adam and his companion to the sides.
How much happiness they experienced in those steps! They were complete. Cain,
conquered by the affection of the Eternal Father, showed him his animals of esteem and
his small garden laden with beautiful flowers. As I was delighted to see them colorful on
that night undone by the brightness of the Creator, as in the daylight! It seemed as if the
Sun itself had come down to them. When thinking about the Sun, Cain as he loved him
very much, began to talk about him saying: - As he is beautiful and good! When he
leaves, however, he leaves in his tears of blood a feeling of sadness and fear.

40 Everything disappears in his absence: the animals, the garden; Even the birds silence
their songs! … But it is enough for him to say that he will appear and, everything is full of
charm; Nature wakes up from her meekness, still appearing to fear darkness, but when
she sees them flee, she remains alert and sings; The animals, the birds, the garden, …
everything returns to a happy life! But, this happiness always ends !!! –

41 After speaking these words, Cain, looking at the Creator, inquired curiously: “Dad
always says that it was you who created the Sun. Is it true?” With a sincerity smile, GOD
answered yes. In the beginning, Cain continued, was he already fleeing to the west? –
“He never flees,” replied the Eternal, “it is the world that flees from him. He is sad with
that Ingratitude! - - But how? – Cain asked, looking curiously at His face of light. With
affectionate words, GOD began to tell him the story of Lucifer who, in his ingratitude
banished from his eyes and from the eyes of a multitude of creatures, the brightness of
His face – the True Sun. –

42 After acting like this, he deceived many by saying that the Sun was the one who fled
from them. With his cunning, the Creator continued, the rebel angel tried to drag the
human being into darkness, and he succeeded. The Sun on that day, wept so many tears
of blood, that bathed the whole sky. In his last sigh of light, however, he promised the
world already taken away by darkness, to return one day to shine forever, filling his
entire bosom of life.

43 After saying these words, the Eternal looking at that young man, with an expression
of sadness in his eyes, concluded by saying: “Today, the rebel angel promises to his
followers that he will go with his strength to stop the sun, but he will never be able to
realize that plan, because it does not have the bond that could stop it: love. – Crestfallen,
Cain heard from the Creator's lips that story of promises, which he had already tired of
hearing from his parents. That story did not give him pleasure, as it showed a long night
of sacrifices on the altar, and of a Savior to perish in pain.

44 Actually, Cain saw no reason for all that. Why not banish the suffering away by
coloring the darkness of light ?! In an effort to conquer him, the Eternal with much love
looked at that dissatisfied young man, and told him that only the blood of His sacrifice
could make the Sun shine forever, in a realm of eternal happiness and peace. There was
no other way for that conquest. Therefore, you should be patient, resting under His care.

45 After conversing for a long time with Cain, in an attempt to make him recognize his
need for salvation, YAHAWAH, turning to the couple, began to comfort them with the
promise of the birth of another son. Thirty-six more sacrifices would be counted, and his
arms would wrap the second son. It would also be born of pain, but it would bring in the
eyes the brightness and comfort of salvation. His testimony of faithfulness would be
perpetuated by all generations, in the symbol of an altar covered in blood. The weeks
went by, bringing the couple new joys and sorrows: from a heart full of life to beat in
Eva’s womb, and from a void with the smell of death to grow in the heart of young Cain.

46 Although he had been dazzled by the manifestation of GOD, that appearance in
nothing changed his arrogant way of thinking about the meaning of life. He saw no sense
in the sacrifices offered on the altar. In the days that followed his encounter with the
Creator, he argued with his parents saying, “If I were powerful like the Eternal, I would
never submit to the sacrifice to reconquer the lost kingdom.” He is strong, and shines
like the sun. He could with one word expel all darkness, returning paradise to us.

47 Why so much suffering ?! – With that argument, Cain was supposed to be wiser than
the Creator. Who knows if, in an upcoming meeting I would have the opportunity to
advise him. In this way, the young Cain immersed himself more and more in the abyss of
pride and selfishness – instead of illusions where he was going, - thinking of walking
towards victory. Hadn’t Lucifer been together with a third of the heavenly hosts attracted
by that same illusion ?! The gracious GOD, still, would not seal Cain’s fate without first
attempting to save him from eternal ruin.

48 That undeserved grace, the fruit of divine love, would be granted to all human beings
who were born in this world.



THE HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSE - Chapter VI
Solaced the revelations of nature, Adam and his companion, students in the school of
suffering, learned every day to love the Savior more. Grew in wisdom, humility and
holiness. All virtues destroyed by sin, reborn in the heart. With encouragement the
couple dedicated to the labor edifying gardens planted by the power of Yahweh were
filled with fragrant flowers and delicious fruits. His home in exile became a refuge for
persecuted animals valleys. The hill, under the protection of the angels of light, became
a miniature Eden apart. Among the animals gathered and tamed with love, had many
sheep. Adam and Eve could not set eyes on these docile animals for sacrifice, without
proving the deep soul of a mixture of pain and gratitude. On the night that preceded
each Saturday, Adam had, by order of the Creator, to repeat the painful act. How much
bitterness and regret supervene the couple by lowering the dark night of the sacrifice! As
consolation brought them the flame of forgiveness that never ceased to shine on the
altar, on those nights prefiguratives! The critical value of sacrifice, so that life could
flourish under the divine protection, led the couple to appreciate immensely your little
flock. Every Friday, however, came to bring, besides the pain, restlessness: - Who will
donate their blood to the altar when the last sheep perish? In the eyes of the couple
amazed, finally happened the miracle of love, renewing them hope to live other weeks in
the glow of the flame of forgiveness: a sheep, the fattest of them, started to bleed like a
sacrifice; From your pain, born them four lambs. Filled with joy and gratitude, Adam and
Eve fell down before the invisible Savior, having hands that brought those new creatures
in their eyes the same gentleness and willingness to sacrifice. Convinced that new
miracles multiply your days, the couple joined their voice as before, a hymn of praise
and worship to the Creator, as also the lambs born of pain in your life to fulfill the
greatest of all sacrifices for the salvation of mankind. The Eternal, though invisible to His
human children, remained very close, accompanied by an army of angels in tireless
ministry of care and protection. The couple was unaware that the sweet calm and peace
reigning in that hill, and all its prosperity, the fruits were so intense fight. If your eyes
were opened to the scenes occurring invisible, would be overcome with astonishment,
How dreadful was the enemy and his hosts in their constant attacks for the purpose of
ruining the human being, snatching it from the hands of the Creator. Seeing that the use
of force does not tantamount to victory, the enemy in his cunning devised a trap with
which to ensnare the couple. Bringing together their armies, revealed to them his plans
saying: - When humans was commanded to sacrifice lambs as symbols of the coming
Savior. The attempt to look at these symbols as carriers of forgiveness and life, making
them gradually forget the reality of sacrifice promised by God. It will be a slow process,
but secure victory. "The Creator knowing the danger of this trap, was grieved, because
when looking at the future, you can see so many of His children being diverted from the
path of salvation. Clinging how many symbols judging them find virtue! God in his love
and care, not leave them unaware of the danger that threatened them. knew how Adam
and his companion loved those lambs, to die on the altar, offered them light and heat.
Easily could be induced to see them as a source of life and light, passing to revere them.
Several weeks had passed, bringing the nights of pain and sacrifice, followed by days of
hope and longing Him loving Father, who after making promises to them and wipe your
tears, had become invisible If before your eyes. Each passing day brought new burden
for the couple of homesickness, making them ask every evening: - When will kiss his
face again? when we will be involved in His arms, walking in the light of His love?! How
Eden longing felt those nights when falling asleep in the soft lap of his divine Father!
Another week of work and lessons learned was coming to a close. The sun in its decline
heralded another night of repentance and innocent blood bathing the altar. Silent The
couple was far from imagining that night, the painful blow that was always followed by
fire, reveal them to face the blessed Father With trembling hands, Adam lifts the lamb,
dumb, does no resistance to be laid upon the altar. Tears rolling down his face at the
thought of one more innocent animals dive hated the darkness of death, with her blood
generate light. Sacrifice is painful, but there is no other way of salvation. Solely through
the shed blood of the Lamb, will live in the future to contemplate the face of the Father
In a painstaking effort that brings down Adam pointed stone about the lamb that in a
moan of pain sheds his blood. A glorious light banishes darkness soon flooding the entire
hill with its rays of life. Through her tears the couple then contemplates in the fire of the
altar, the Creator. a gesture of love, Yahweh opens his arms as before, with a smile and
walks to the long-awaited hug. Without finding words to express their immense longing,
the couple casts up to his chest and weeps bitterly. The heavenly Father, moved, also
crying, but tries to console her children with her sweet smile. excitement With the couple
contemplates the face of the Father, involving with kisses and caresses. Their love for
him was intensified by suffering. Grateful and happy, walking beside the Creator,
showing you the gardens laden with flowers and fruits. They tell you the lessons learned
in nature, show- his flock tamed by affection. Illuminated by the soft light of the Eternal
Father, the couple sits at His feet as before, to hear His teachings. The Creator, watching
them tenderly, proceeds to warn them of the danger. Guide - about the sacrifices of
lambs, which were important in order to keep in mind the certainty of a coming Savior,
as the lambs would be sacrificed for the redemption of sinners. Lambs, however, had no
power in themselves to forgive guilt because consisted merely symbols of the Messiah
King After being made aware of the danger of becoming attached to the symbols seeking
to find salvation in them, the couple was given the job of transmitting these guidelines to
their descendants. After warning the human being, the Creator resting his gaze on the
sheep that lay dormant along with their puppies, exclaimed: - How beautiful are the
lambs! The couple, in a mixture of happiness and pain added: - They jump when agreed
with pleasure, forgetting that at birth and at death cause so much pain After
contemplating the lambs, Yahweh looked at the couple tenderly showing them
something that surprised and gladdened: - When these lambs there are thirty-six
ascended the altar, your arms will involve the first child, as they also arise from pain. son
in his childhood This will bring joy to the lambs jumping in your home. Shalt instruct you
with dedication in the laws of harmony, showing them the path of redemption. Like you,
he will be free to choose the direction following. Accepting the teaching, his life will be
victorious; rejecting it, walk to defeat. heard Adam and Eve with the promise of eternal
joy, but at the same time experienced the depths of being a fear of becoming aware of
the responsibility that would. knew that Satan would make every effort to take the child
promised to perdition. was late at night when the Creator, after caressing their children,
left them asleep on the soft lawn. After the promise, each lamb was brought to the altar
pulse more strong in the womb the hope of joy that will soon reach. Thirty-six finally
receded into darkness fulfilling time determined by the Creator in which the first child to
receive light. With hands still stained by the blood of the sacrifice, Adam steadied his
wife at the foot of the altar, prostrated himself overcome by pain that brought her first
child. A small child brought no joy in the face of freedom, but the cry of his arrest; This
mourning would last all night, not for the brilliance of that flame Heated hope that soon
attracted the attention of his little eyes alert. Wrapping it with joy, Eva consoled his grief,
said: "I have reached the promise of the Eternal." then gave him the name of Cain. After
engaging the little boy with the soft fur of a lamb, the couple remained awake to
meditate. Many were the thoughts that occupied their minds: thoughts of joy, gratitude,
hope and longing for the sense of responsibility that weighed on his shoulders now.
Caressing tenderly the small child, the couple has matured in his experience, better
understanding the mysterious love of Yahweh that to save His children, willing himself to
die in their place. Adam and Eve were not alone in their reflections: all intelligent beings
in the Universe considered with interest about the future of helpless baby in a realm of
intimate brought infinite dimensions to be disputed by the two powers Cain would not
have the promise? Toddler with his shining eyes of joy looked so much like the lambs that
were born and grew with the mission to be sacrificed! Considering thus squeezing the
couple's young son to his chest began to cry disconsolately. How terrible it would be to
offer her little innocent rude altar For the couple by a broken pain emerged in the bright
end sun reviving its warm rays with the promises that pointed to a Savior who, even in
the future, also born of pain to fulfill the eternal plan of redemption. Blessed by the
Creator and enveloped by the love and care of parents, the child was developing in his
physical and mental nature, becoming every day a bigger target relentless battle
between the spiritual hosts. Adam and Eve, eager to make him understand the truths of
salvation, taking him in his arms every dawn and at the edge of altar he pointed Eden
distant, telling those stories of emotion which the little Cain still could not understand.
Which was the joy of those parents, to see him in a sunny morning, with the little hand
pointing to the home of nostalgia, pronouncing sacred name of the Creator. Thrilled took
him in his arms, asking him to repeat this sublime name, which key of happiness, always
undrawn them a paradise of eternal love. All hosts of light bowed themselves with joy at
the small child to pronounce the name of the divine King Weeks went going bringing new
victims to the altar, and the little Cain, the focus of attention and care of Yahweh, the
hosts of light and those lovers parents tireless mission to instruct you, gathering his few
words, always curious about everything has to wonder. Declined the day when the boy
lying at his mother's lap, asked him: - Mom, why the sun always goes away, leaving us in
the cold the dark? "Eve surprise beheld his son, finding no words to answer her question
that brought him to the remembrance of past happiness destroyed by guilt. After a
moment of silence, kissing the face of little Cain said to him: - Sonny one day the sun will
come to stay, bringing in its rays a world of harmony, there will be no animals to fight or
to die lambs on the altar "Little Cain wanting to see that day dawn soon, he said to his
mother: - Mom, tomorrow the sun will rise in paradise; asked him to stay! so I can play,
play, and never sleep. " Eager to see daybreak that would not end, the little Cain only fell
asleep after making his mother promise to ask the sun to stay. A new day bright sun to
walk the sky came to Cain, bringing in its rays joy and warmth. While playing in the
garden, her curious little eyes were turned often to the sun that seemed to caress him
with a smile of hope. Seeing him, however, walk towards the west, the small ran his
mother, asking her: - Mom, he vowed to stay? "Eve, taking him in his arms, smiled at him
trying to make him understand with simple words as he pointed his distant paradise, the
story of redemption. The sun would come one day to stay. Cain, dissatisfied with his
mother's words proved not to have patience to wait for that day that lay far in the future.
Repeated in tears: - "I want the sun today, not tomorrow!" Eva patiently sought to calm
his son, talking about the birth of Yahweh, which can make the evening an arrow How
painful words of rebellion of Cain penetrated the heart of Eve, making crying bitterly.
Believers throughout the universe joined in mourning. An infinite sadness hung over the
heart of the Creator rejected. Sketched on the gestures of Cain the first steps down the
path of rebellion. How many would follow towards death! unaware of the sadness that
had shot up over the
kingdom of light, Adam, to see the sun declines on the horizon, left his job in the field
heading to home. the little Cain only fell asleep after making his mother promise to ask
the sun to stay. A new day bright sun to walk the sky came to Cain, bringing in its rays
joy and warmth. While playing in the garden, her curious little eyes were turned often to
the sun that seemed to caress him with a smile of hope. Seeing him, however, walk
towards the west, the small ran his mother, asking her: - Mom, he vowed to stay? "Eve,
taking him in his arms, smiled at him trying to make him understand with simple words
as he pointed his distant paradise, the story of redemption. The sun would come one day
to stay. Cain, dissatisfied with his mother's words proved not to have patience to wait for
that day that lay far in the future. repeated in tears: - "I want the sun today, not
tomorrow!" Eva patiently sought to calm his son, talking about the birth of Yahweh,
which can make the evening an arrow How painful words of rebellion of Cain penetrated
the heart of Eve, making crying bitterly. Believers throughout the universe joined in
mourning. An infinite sadness hung over the heart of the Creator rejected. Sketched on
the gestures of Cain the first steps down the path of rebellion. How many would follow
towards death! unaware of the sadness that had shot up over the kingdom of light,
Adam, to see the sun declines on the horizon, left his job in the field heading to home.
Had a song in the heart while walking to another meeting with his. When approaching
the altar, he saw his companion beside him prostrate With sobs of great sorrow, Adam
joined them in mourning. The memory of the Savior, however, consoled. Wiping his tears
and his young son, told him tenderly: - "We can rejoice sonny, because Yahweh promised
to make the sun shine forever in heaven he is like a fire that appears at the altar,
banishing the darkness of the night" .With their eyes focused on the last glow of the
afterglow, Cain remained without comfort. That evening, there was as usual a cheerful
dinner. A small family, sadly, remained silent to meditate for long hours until sleepy fall
asleep under the starlight. Enemy and his hosts of wickedness in sarcasm mocked that
night suffering from God and His faithful. Repeating the words of the little rebellion Cain
boasted as winner. In defiance of the Creator spoke: - See how this my little slave rejects
you! The same will happen with all those who will be born. I am sure that the right
domain will never leave my hands. All hosts rebels repeated in echo the grievances of
the deceiver, humiliating the subjects who suffered light side of the Eternal. With their
reproach, the enemy sought Yahweh to give up his plan of redemption. If that happened,
his kingdom of darkness would last for all eternity, supplanting the field of light.
Responding to the challenge of the enemy, the Eternal said solemnly: - Although all
reject me, I will fulfill the promise. The Creator could not bear the thought of seeing the
little Cain walk to perdition. Interceded for him every day, offering to justice who would
shed His blood. Mighty angels guarded him every moment, beating the spiritual darkness
that surround looking to make it insensitive to the benefits of salvation, which were
illustrated by symbols. Adam and Eve in his tireless ministry of love, every day taught
Cain the spiritual lessons illustrated in nature. sought to establish in every Saturday on
his youthful mind the hope of eternal life, which would be the result of the sacrifice of the
Savior. He after living a sinless life, died as a lamb, in order to expel the darkness
forever. Cain was moved at times with the teachings, but almost always questioned
hesitantly. Disgusted asked: - Why Samael was rebelling?! One night, refusing to listen to
the advice of his parents, accused of all evil saying - If not now have a sun shining, it is
your fault. "Contemplation of Eden distant bathed in sunshine birthed in the heart of
youth Cain thoughts of adventure. He began to think: "This paradise is not so far as to
say Mom and Dad. Why wait and suffer so long?! It is so beautiful! From it comes the sun
all day! If we conquer, it's easy to hold the light in its source; Thus we live in a paradise
of eternal sunshine. The ideas of adventure
Cain, filled the hearts of Adam and Eve of sadness. They saw that his interest was only
by this time, he dreamed of a paradise of happiness and light conquered by his strength.
On his plans, he felt no need of a Savior; - For, if it was so young, intelligent, full of life
and ideals? - said. The days of struggles, sacrifices and intercessions for the fate of Cain
were going. Precious opportunities arose each day before him to cling to the Savior, but
all rejected, one by one. In their unbelief came to doubt the existence of Yahweh, which
he had never seen. Parents that afflicted but always with patience, tried save him from
perdition to which he was walking, he promised one day after smiling with an air of
incredulity, believe in the Creator and His plan of salvation, if He became visible at the
time sacrifice. burning with faith, those parents began to cry out to the Eternal. His
visible presence could perhaps save that dear son that every day became more
rebellious. The Creator heard the cry of the afflicted parents. Although he knew that his
appearance would hardly break the heart of the young Cain his rebellious spirit, was
willing to comply with the request. Extend arms Friends Cain, looking with love conquer
her heart. know Like their desires and dreams of adventure could easily identify Himself
with him, captivating him, because he was also someone who always carried her chest
dreams of adventure , It was not the creation of the universe a great adventure?! His
dream was not seeing it studded with blazing suns illuminating billion worlds with its
luster?! There was also his biggest cross the valley of death, seeking the conquest of
Eden apart, forever trapping the sun in your sky?! They had much in common! Cain was
curious that Friday. On the face of parents, through courage and joy, fruit of a great faith.
Encouraged by this expression of confidence, the young man began to assist them in
preparing for the holy Sabbath. The sun finally dodged by rolling to the west, leaving as
usual its wake longing announcing fear. In the darkness, Cain discerned the white figure
of the lamb being raised to the altar by the father's hands - this tireless priest who was
always begging the Creator for the salvation of his beloved son. With uplifted hand,
Adam was about to blow which could perhaps break the heart of Cain unbelief, giving
birth in a single moment belief in salvation. His lips escapes then the prayer of faith: -
Eternal Father, hear my request, my child need Thee! Only a glance Your can conquer it.
Come Lord! This earnest prayer fell on ears that son stirring up it. Only prayer would be
enough to convince you of the actual existence of a Savior. while wiping the tears of
emotion, Cain trembles at the sound of the blow of death. Everything was solemn at that
time; would come the Creator of the world in response to the prayer of love?! The How
would face in their unbelief?! A strong logo glow enveloped the whole hill bathing also
eastern valley. Eyes wide with Cain then landed in the loving eyes of the Creator who
brought the face a glow than the sun, but not blinding. beholding Him with awe, Cain
said : - He is young like me, and it looks like the sun! Adam and Eve, moved by the great
missed were eager to jump to the Savior's chest and kissing him, but left that He met
first with Cain. With joy they saw the precious child involved in the arms of a great friend,
who was like his star. After a long embrace, Yahweh also hugged and kissed the dear
couple, companions in suffering. With joy, went out to walk in the gardens of the hill. At
the center were the Creator and Cain, flanked by Adam and his companion. What
happiness experienced these steps! Were complete. Cain won the affection of the Eternal
Father showed Him their pets and their small garden full of beautiful flowers. How was
delighted to see them colored tonight undone by the brilliance of the Creator, as in the
daylight! It seemed even the sun lowered them. Thinking about the Sun, Cain and loved
him, began to talk about him saying: - Because it is beautiful and good! When he walks
away, leaves her bloody tears a feeling of sadness and fear. everything disappears in
their absence: the animals, the garden, even the birds hush their corners! But suffice it
to say ... it will show up, everything is full of charm; Nature awakens softly, looking even
fear the darkness, but when you see them flee, is alert and sings; animals, the birds, the
garden, ... it all comes back to live happy! But this happiness always ends!! After
speaking these words, the Creator Cain staring curious asked: - Dad always said it was
you who created the sun is true? With a smile of sincerity Yahweh answered him yes. -
When you did in the beginning, Cain continued, he fled to the west? - He never escapes,
answered the Eternal, the world is fleeing him. He is saddened by this ingratitude! - But
how? Cain asked, watching his face light curious. With tender words, Yahweh came to tell
him the story of Lucifer in his ingratitude banned from their eyes and the eyes of a
multitude of creatures, the brightness of His face - the True Sun After so act eluded many
saying it was the Sun who ran them. With his cunning, continued the Creator, the rebel
angel sought to drag humans into darkness, and succeeded. The sun that day, cried
many tears of blood that bathed the whole sky. In his last breath of light, however, he
promised the world has taken the darkness, to return one day to shine forever, filling
your entire life within. After speaking these words to you, the Eternal staring at the
young man, with an expression of sadness in the eyes concluded by saying: - Today, the
rebel angel promises its followers that will hold its strength with the sun, but he will
never be able to realize this plan, it does not have the bond that can stop him: love.
Crestfallen, Cain heard from the lips of the Creator that story of promises, which is
already tired of listening to their parents. This story gave him no pleasure, because it
showed a long night of sacrifices on the altar, and a Savior to perish in pain. Actually,
Cain saw no reason for all this. Why not just banish suffering coloring darkness light?! In
an effort to conquer it, the Eternal with great love that young man looked unhappy, and
told him that only the blood of His sacrifice could make the sun shine forever in a
kingdom of eternal happiness and peace. There was no other way for this achievement.
Therefore, patients should be resting up under His care. After talking for a long time with
Cain, in an attempt to make him recognize their need for salvation, Yahweh Himself
returning to the couple came to comfort them with the promise of the birth of another
child. Over thirty-six sacrifices would be counted, and their arms would involve the
second child. Also born of pain, but the eyes would shine and comfort of salvation. The
witness of fidelity would be perpetuated through all generations, the symbol of an altar
covered in blood. The weeks were going, bringing the couple of new joys and sorrows: a
heart full of pulsating life in the womb of Eve, and an empty smelling of death growing in
the heart of the young Cain. Though he has been dazzled before the manifestation of
Yahweh in anything that you changed your appearance so arrogant to think about the
meaning of life. He saw no point in the sacrifices offered on the altar. In the days
following his meeting with the Creator, he argued with his parents saying: - If I were as
powerful as the Eternal, I will never submit to the sacrifice to regain the lost kingdom. He
is strong, and shining like the sun. He could with one word expel all darkness, giving us
paradise. So much suffering?! With this argument, Cain was assumed wiser than the
Creator. Who knows, in the next meeting would have the opportunity to advise him.
Thus, the young Cain deepened increasingly in the abyss of pride and selfishness -
illusions to place where he was going, thinking to be heading for victory. Lucifer was not
coupled with a third of the heavenly hosts attracted by this same illusion?! The good
Yahweh, however, does not seal the fate of Cain without first seeking all forms save him
from eternal ruin. Such undeserved grace, fruit of heavenly love, would be granted to
every human being that would be born into this world.




THE HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSE - Chapter VII
The thirty-six weeks announced by the Creator were fulfilled, bringing the night's holy
Sabbath, which would go up to the altar a lamb's promise - one that diving in darkness,
eyes would shine in the comfort of Abel Light. Similar to lamb, Eva felt that night the
pain of giving birth. Adam, with his hands still bathed in the blood of the sacrifice
involved the frail body of this child with the soft fur of a sheep - robes symbolizing justice
Protective Savior. Contemplating cherished him in his arms, Adam told him fondly:
"Sonny, your father is Yahweh." Then gave him the name of Abel. When the Dawn Cain
witnessed the joy of his parents for the birth of that son was possessed by feelings of
jealousy and wrath mágoas.Com told them that, for his life, only seen them cry. Would
this little intruder alone worthy of their joys?! Adam and Eve fondly sought to show how
much they loved Cain and Abel's birth should not sadden you, but cheer him for the
privilege of having a brother who will be a friend and companion, could work together to
change the world a haven of peace. Abel, surrounded by divine grace grew in their
physical and mental nature. still small, began to understand the meaning of those bloody
sacrifices. The thought that the Creator of the universe would become a child as he, with
the mission to offer himself in sacrifice as those innocent lambs, for the redemption of
sinners, thrilled him to tears. Like Cain, Abel loved nature with its gardens full of flowers
and fruits; She was also sad to see the sun fall over the horizon, wounded by the dark
night. However, meat was not adventurous dreams, but of hope and confidence that
they would surrender like lambs to the altar, after heating with the light of His truth
man's heart in the night of sin arise as sun on Saturday, bringing the eternal victory. The
couple, fertilized by heavenly love, spawned two girls who, in turn, began to be played in
the great spiritual battle for the fate of the universe. Aware of their responsibility, those
parents sought impress upon the minds of his daughters, the eternal truths of the
kingdom of light. In this effort they were aided by Abel, to whom the plan of redemption
was the theme of his most sweet meditations; Just looking for a lamb, came to her mind
the sweet remembrance of the promised redemption. It was his great love for the
Creator that led him to become a shepherd. The influence of Cain, however, was
negative about those girls. speaking He lived his dreams of adventure. Pointing to the
distant paradise, home of the rising sun, promised to win you a day with his forces. No
more nights, because it
would stop the sun before his departure. In his conquest, the valleys become dark in
flower gardens filled with peace. Inspired by this ideal, Cain became a farmer. Planted
gardens that bore flowers and fruits. Fought strongly against thorns and thistles, which
he believed he could finally banish them completely with their effort. Poor Cain, slave to
an illusion! Cain has finally become similar in stature to his father. He had the face
flushed brands sun he loved, and your muscles the power that he thought needed to
stop him before his departure. Driven by dreams fed since childhood, now preparing for a
road trip: would go down to the unknown valley and would walk toward the house of the
sun. I did not know how many days would be gone from his home, but he was sure it
would be victorious in his mission. Full of enthusiasm, Cain revealed to his decision to
leave his family. All were concerned, and sought repeatedly to make him give up his
plan. In the valley, said her parents, live wild animals, always ready to devour. Between
laughs, Cain sought to convince them talking about their strength. He told them that in
his day, far from finding defeats, find the lost path that would lead to regaining the
dream shattered by sin. Abel, who knows the true path that leads to victory, with tears of
compassion tried to stop him, telling him the plan of redemption. Turning his back, Cain
went thwarted. Angered for not finding by his family, no support for your noble mission.
Adam and Eve, accompanied by Abel and his two daughters, sadly followed him begging
to stay, but he went forward in his steps down the hill, plunging that menacing jungle
that separated them from paradise. The evening reached Cain already far from home,
that forest dangerous and hostile. The darkness brought fear to his heart; already was
not that brave fighter who promised victory in all his steps. She remembered home and
had regret the way ungrateful as their parents had treated that morning. There in the
dark valley for the first time longed for the sacrificial fire; however, he had never
believed in redemption symbolized by the death of the lamb! He believed in the power of
his life, warmed by the sun, growing in strength and hope one day to stop it over a
kingdom of eternal peace and harmony. At home, her parents and siblings could not
sleep. Were willing to go in search of the beloved Cain, but where to find it? Remembered
the cruel demons that infested the invisible valley, tormenting animals day after day
would become fiercer. In agony and fell down at the feet of the invisible Creator and
cried earnestly for your protection. Besought Him to bring back home, because without
it, everything was so sad. The Eternal deeply loved Cain, and never leave him alone in
that forest. Responding to the prayers that afflicted family, sent His angels to protect him
from all dangers. Cain won the oppressive darkness of night brought with it the winds of
fear, resistless fell to the cold ground. He remained there until his courage and strength
be restored by the light of dawn. Excited by the brightness of hope, continued his
adventurous steps towards birthplace of the sun: the paradise which dreamed of since
childhood. His feet led him to that day through a valley intensely marked by death.
Gazed with astonishment on all sides dry bones and remains of animals devoured
ferociously. To his ears, came howls and cries of beasts threatening. While bathed in
sunshine, Cain began to get scared. Property, remembered the home, the advice and
entreaties of parents; thought the constant prayers that were with him, I was sure that
they would not let her cry for food security that dangerous forest, despite their
ingratitude. Taken in amazement, he finally saw the sun slowly walk to his death daily. If
trembled in his presence, what he would reserve the dark night?! Reviving, however, the
dreams that had since childhood, as a soldier even hit by a stroke, rises in a last ditch
effort to win, Cain fed up of mind; He would overcome the fear and conquer the whole
jungle, banishing it all Dry bones and signs of death .Refreshed by illusory plans in firm
steps continued their journey. Poor Cain! The first of a crowd, enslaved by the same
dreams of progress, would walk into the night, thinking to find the birthplace of all light.
Before the eyes of Cain who could ever imagine that every step he took led him farther
that sun which aimed to conquer, distant shone through the branches one dazzling light.
Full of curiosity, hurried steps, asking silent: But how, if I see it decline?! That would be
another star in his crib waiting for the departure time for that daily ordeal? With her
heart pounding with emotion, said in his footsteps, judging power that new day stop him
in his departure; thus inaugurate a kingdom of light, conquered by his strength. Rushing
to light, however, when he saw fading already close; would vertigo? No. fade just to
prove to your eyes brighter. Noting glare, Cain was stunned to see that it came from the
face of a cherub powerful protector who, since the fall of their parents remained there
watching the currencies of Eden. Mute, Cain watched the sweet face of that angel,
expressive of love, was
reborn in your heart emotions of childhood. He was now forgotten his mission, in
remembrance reliving the encounter he had with the Creator that evening sacrifice. The
cherub was similar to Yahweh, having a glow on the face of the sun. Stamping concern in
the countenance, the angel after contemplating it at length asked: - What search my
son? Remembering their forgotten ideal, Cain replied: - I seek the source of the day, the
birthplace of the sun. "Angel kept asking: - What drives you to seek him with such
longing." Cain replied: - I am a lover of light that makes me see every day the fruit of my
labor. I admire him since my childhood, so bring on chest ideal day stop it on the sky ".
Cherub penalized watched him, unsure how to convince him that illusion nurtured for so
many years. After a moment of silent angel air of sadness, trying to make him remember
the words that the Creator had said at that meeting, asked: - How will you stop it?
Confident Cain raised his arms in response. huge gardens not built with them ?! Angel, in
an effort to make him understand that the sun is a symbol of the Savior said to him: -
Cain, nothing can stop him except love. Whoever loves walking in the same direction.
Where you see walking every day? There is westward? then follows in his footsteps and
never see him cry tears of blood. Accompanies him on his journey and see what you
always called death, is a joyful dawn for a continent in addition, lost in the darkness. "
The affirmation Angel Cain did remember the last words spoken by the Eternal that night
turned into day. He said that only the blood of His sacrifice could make the light shine
forever triumph over darkness. Annoyed, Cain bowed his head, determined not to follow
Him in this direction. Shaken, Cain was now faced with a serious decision that would
change the course of his life and a crowd that would follow him. Mute and trembling
remained prostrate at the feet of the angel, while fierce struggle waged in his heart.
Since childhood nurtured an ideal, moving toward a paradise which thought to conquer
by force. now the angel pointed him a path opposite of love and sacrifice: it taught by
parents and by the Creator. Sorry, Cain wished to return home, but the enemy opposed
inspiring her nakedness How would face his family, whom he had promised victory for its
strength, returning empty-handed?! With young Cain, prostrate at his feet, with the voice
of the angel tenderly urged: - Son, go back home! There is no way to win besides love.
He may have thorns on the path and an altar, but it's a safe path because it always takes
the traveler to the arms of a loving family, fondly hopes the fruit of his forgiveness.
humiliating not be back, this is not the path of the sun ?! The path of pride is always
unknown; On your path can have flowers and the promise that there will be no altar, but
the end is always in the night, far from the heated arms for forgiveness. Return to home
son! Come back!! The angel with her loving advice was finally able to convince Cain. He
was determined to follow the path of love, undoing the steps hitherto driven by
selfishness. Now await the sun to humbly follow him towards the altar, no longer spoke
to him of defeat, but of triumph over death. In the distant hill, stood the family praying
incessantly for Cain. In his lust, could not stay away from that altar, birthplace of tears
and blood. There beside him, Cain came into the world, bathed in the light of the
sacrifice; Ali had been instructed in the way of salvation. Ali unsparing in faith to see him
return repentant. Under the Smile Angel, Cain overcome by exhaustion of their broken
dreams, fell asleep one step from paradise invisible walls - walls that could only be finally
transposed the love which sacrifices. A gentle breeze woke him that morning, inviting
them to follow the sun on that journey to the altar. How two companions would advance
on the thorns, breaking them with their wounded feet, As warriors would walk towards
the hill of the evening, not to be overcome through the night, but to destroy it in his
escape. In this march redemption, topple finally on the distant altar, not defeated by
death, but winning life born of light. With humility, Cain took the first steps on the path of
repentance - that way right after the altar, you undrawn your loving home. Steps were
moved by faith, because before you could not see the face of his companion, the sun,
but he was sure his presence because the shoulders could feel its warmth caressing him
in a tender embrace. were fellow travelers on the road victory. It was the sixth day. On
the hill, family, anxious, was gathered from the morning around the altar, unconscious
processing experience by Cain lived there in the currencies of Eden. With tears prayed to
Yahweh by dear Cain, longing to see him return. How was the preparation day, joined in
the work, leaving everything in order to receive the holy Sabbath: retract the gardens,
collected food, trimmed robes and split the lamb for the sacrifice. was an activity often
interrupted by trips to altar, where extended length the gaze over the valley, hoping that
seeing emerge who both loved. Cain, though tired from the long journey,
still advancing with light steps, longing to reach the foot of the hill before night. Currency
it could still distant, sun-drenched west. The evening that until the day before had been
seen as the victory of darkness over light, processed up before your eyes. Now he saw
the sun shrouded by clouds paints a vivid red, fall like a conquering hero, about to
deliver a continent apart, the power of the night. Darkness enveloped the valley, and it
Cain who, with eyes fixed on the last flash dissipate the horizon, struggled to continue in
his footsteps. On the hill, the patriarch Adam, with his heart throbbing with longing,
yearning and pain, preparing to offer sacrifice. Intercede as ever that night by his son,
whose absence tortured his soul. Eve, by slow, sorrowful, followed her husband into the
altar, accompanied by Abel and his two daughters. Suffered much that night, by the
absence of Cain. Hope to see him off almost entirely banished. In a painful effort Adam
raised lamb, laying it on the altar. How painful was sacrificing, but there was no other
way Head down into the darkness, Cain reflected. All his past built by illusory dreams
saw Redone, at dawn of the fifth day, went into the unknown, to a halt in the valley
afraid of bones, where the evening turned with longing awaited the time to pursue his
journey, guided the fire that will indicate the direction of his home. Moved by the pain of
homesickness and the last ray of hope to embrace his son, Adam raised his knife to kill
the lamb. From his quivering lips, then escapes one harrowing prayer in favor of his son:
- Lord, now I understand how you suffer with the rebellion of your children rebel, who
switched your love and warmth of a loving family that lives within the light, the darkness
of the valley, where despair and death draw with illusions of victory. Right now my hand
is raised to hurt this innocent sheep who, with his precious blood will feed the fire of
hope to embrace my son who is lost . Do Lord, with the glow of this flame can reach my
Cain where he is, making him return home sorry. All the subjects of the Eternal with
emotion beheld the poignant scene of meaning so grand. That father shaky and upset,
ready to sacrifice in favor of erring child, saw the great Father, His human children to
attract the valley of perdition, offer the greatest sacrifice. Upon his agonizing prayer,
Adam immolated Lamb. The fire of hope arose immediately in bright flame, dispelling the
darkness that enveloped that hill. Cain to be moved by the joy of Saturday raised his
brow in the darkness hoping to behold the glow of victory, raised his hands to heaven
grateful when he saw arise in the darkened horizon the star of acceptance. Full of cheer
continued in his footsteps of faith. Although it was impossible to see and understand all
the obstacles that arose in his path causing him to stumble, he kept his gaze on the
brightness of the slain lamb, always advancing, with the certainty of victory. Cain's
footsteps led him finally with the hill where he could see his family together in the light
of the altar. With heart pounding by fatigue and emotion, in light steps ascended the hill,
stopping at the altar. His family, with his eyes closed prayed for him. It contained the
tears upon hearing his father cry: - "Lord Cain My, my Cain! When enfold her in my
arms?! Wish to return to the past, when gladly took him on her lap. He was my joy and
hoped to have it always safe with me. But oh Lord He was growing and moving away, led
by their dreams of adventure.
And today is already the fourth day without our Cain! My heart is broken for your
absence, and no longer bear to live without it! If the Eternal can bring back our Cain, and
he is happy beside Thee. Amen After the prayer, Adam opened his eyes to behold the
flame of forgiveness that could perhaps attract your child that dark valley. His gaze went
from full on Cain lying prostrate at the altar. Not contain the joy Adam with a shout of
victory jumped to her by her son, wrapping him in his arms. The whole family
accompanied this affectionate gesture, partying with laughter and tears of emotion, the
return of that beloved son and brother. Under the light of the altar, everyone sat down
finally going to listen carefully past experience by Cain that dense forest. He told of the
fear she felt that first night away from home; spoke of Death Valley, where he saw many
animal bones devoured ferociously; told of light that appeared at dusk, making him
hasten his steps judging be the emergence of a sun . He spoke of the bright angel who
had drawn for currencies of Eden, taking him with their advice and words of wisdom and
love for a change of direction. Told of his return, the struggles and temptations that faced
each step. Concluded counting the joy he felt upon seeing the appearance that night of
the fire on the altar, which resembles a star, guided his steps through that valley taken
by darkness. For the family, comforted by the return of Cain, finally came the dawn of
joyful victory, bringing in its breeze the scent of Edenic green meadows covered with
eternal flowers. On that Saturday morning, joined in songs of gratitude to the Creator for
life, forgiveness, and the certainty that their happy marriage would never be tainted by
sin. "Even if I knew your future rebellion, the Creator would do everything possible to
keep him safe from the enemy. On the hill, at the home filled with happiness, Cain
became after his conversion on the main subject of praise and celebration. As a child,
humble and submissive, Cain walked among his face taking in the glow of love and hope,
which were nourished by the light of the altar. Tears of gratitude now distinguished in
each lamb slain Redeemer coming to perish in pain to give them the light of eternal
victory. Joyfully, Cain testified before his family and before the vast universe, the peace
that now flooded his soul now reborn; never before experienced such a feeling of
freedom, both love. Refrigerated About his mind, however, began to lower the shadows
of temptation, which intensified to immerse it in dark night. was beset by many
temptations in his heart seemed to reinvigorate the illusory dreams of his past. voices
seemed to shout in your heard saying: - Let this path that leads no victory! Enough of
these bloody sacrifices which bring death! Admire the gardens planted you, and see how
they celebrate life. You are wise and strong, and able to build an empire of peace and
prosperity, colored by extensive gardens that bloom in eternal spring sun. Shaken by the
storm of temptations, Cain almost flinching, let it show on your face the agony that
flooded her soul. thus his grief was soon perceived puts his family that worried him
sought to know the reasons for his distress. Fearing to expose your family what ailed
him, shut up saying it was just a feeling of regret would soon pass. parents were
afflicted, as rightly concluded that it was Satan who was pressing it in order to drag it
back to slavery. Tears, those fathers cried unto the Creator in favor of that child who,
afflicted, walked from one side to the other trying to find relief. powerful Angels strove up
insistent that conflict waged become invisible to human eyes. Though severely tested,
Cain would not reach the point of being forced by the enemy to surrender to sin. had an
army at your side to support him in his footsteps loyalty. All Universe was attentive to the
decisions of Cain, which could influence the experience of countless human beings who
follow in their footsteps. Guided by the example of their parents, Cain sought refuge in
prayer for his tortured soul. fervently implored the Creator to the firm his footsteps.
Though feel strong call to return to the path of pride and adventure, was determined to
continue his footsteps by rail bumpy love and sacrifice. Fearing not reach your goal on
Cain, Satan ordered his warriors to suspend those desperate attacks. Told them that
through subtle deception circumvent unlikely to achieve the victory by force.
Consequently, peace reigned again in the mind of Cain that united the family, sang
praises to the Eternal, the author of their salvation. Whilst one family joyfully celebrated
another victory achieved in the life of Cain, the hosts of darkness were gathered plotting
new attack plans. Several ideas were presented, but prevailed those made by Lucifer,
archdeceiver. confident He said: - If as we approached Cain as friends on their journey on
the path of salvation, inspiring thoughts and feelings of faith in the Redeemer, we will
not be difficult to introduce subtlety with the seeds of rebellion that germinate one by
one on your trusting heart, making him finally belittle the sacrifices of blood on the altar,
with the thought of no longer rely on this symbol to have in mind the coming Savior.
deluded When judging have reached spiritual maturity, will be back into the abyss. "
That hill, which was the center of attention of the whole universe, succeeded to the small
family day of joy, prosperity and peace. Grew ever more wisdom and grace, treading the
path of salvation. Behind this peace, however, the family unconscious joyous, a
dangerous trap armed itself. The Lord and His armies were concerned about this
situation, because they knew that their enemies could cause this outfit, a large ruin to
humanity, the experience of which processes the redemption of the universe. Warriors of
Light now, they would not fight the darkness, but against a tinsel. Apparently surrounded
by positive influences, which carry all thought of the Creator, Cain became gradually
confident and secure victory promised. His love for the Eternal seemed to become
immense, and vibrated to provide the perfect happiness that reach the dawn of eternal
day. Aware that Satan followed him in his religious experience, saw there time to draw
him with his false light, diverting it from the path of righteousness. supervised once
again his warriors to act with caution and patience, subtly inspiring thoughts and feelings
apparent reason to take him imperceptibly to neglect finally blood sacrifice on the altar,
judging be reached at his sanctification a higher level, in which no longer depends on
that painful rite. In his love of learning, and attachment to the whole revelation, Cain
began to have their attention drawn to the false glow that initially seemed to make it
clear and safe path of redemption. Presented with courage to his family that admired
gathered to their feet, the thoughts of apparent wisdom and grace, generated by your
new experience. Gone were to know that those ideas so beautiful and captivating, were
originated by one who through the serpent seduced Eve had succeeded in his words and
praises, Cain proceeded to exalt the Savior, praising His future sacrifice. Inspiring these
thoughts, Satan gained the sympathy not only of Cain, as well as all that family.
However, Cain apparently became a teacher and eloquent preacher of righteousness and
truth, deceived in his false security, began to despise his teachings in the sacrifice of the
lamb on the altar. argued that only the illustrations of nature and verbal instructions
were sufficient to record the human mind the truths of redemption. Appealing to the
emotions of the family, said that the goal established by the Creator through those
sacrifices had been made in their lives, could now avoid this pain, presenting offerings
on the altar of flowers and fruits, natural symbols of redemption. A large bow pitched up
on that family, taking her to a large inner struggle. On one side was the path of pain and
altar bathed in blood, and the other, the joy of an apparent victory, celebrated by an
altar covered with flowers and fruits. accept the proposal if coming through Cain, would
fall under the domain of tempting. Family in race, Satan through Cain insisted, trying to
get them to decide on their side, saying that if the Eternal does not care about this
change, maturing and expressing gratitude for His sacrifice, also symbolized by flowers
and fruits. Whole universe was in commotion, before the decision that family was about
to manifest. What was at stake was the throne of the universe. After fierce spiritual
battle, aware of the deception that lurked in the words of Cain, those parents fearing
being dragged away from Salvador, decided to reject that proposal. Influenced by the
decision in favor of the truth revealed by the Eternal, Abel and his younger sister placed
themselves alongside the parents. Only the older sister, who cultivated the intimate
great admiration for Cain, remained undecided, favoring his older brother in the
discussions that took place. Although count on the fall of the entire human family, the
hosts of light enemy rejoiced in having Cain as a slave again. To battle now the conquest
of that young undecided that joined his brother, could become the mother of a sinful
generation, within which to fortify the kingdom of darkness. Become aware of the rebel
position of Cain, Adam and Eve, followed by his two faithful children, began to beseech
him with love, trying to convince him of the error. That son, however, maintained its
position without being aggressive. Was confident of having the approval of the Creator
for his revolutionary ideas. Cain was sad not to have the whole family at his side, but
perked up before the manifestation of understanding and support from her sister. The
affinity of his ideas led them to spend long hours talking about the future. Thus was born
among them the idea of building a new altar where Cain, as a priest, could put in place a
new service offering in place of lambs , flowers and fruits. This, of course, meant the
formation of a new home because Adam as priest of a cult conservative, never allow the
altar of his family was tainted by a cult than that established by the Creator. The ideal
was growing in the heart of this young couple, bringing dreams of a home filled with
children playing in paradise bathed in sunshine. Cain, the lord and master of that new
family, would lead a walk of victory, illuminated by the glow of a fire more brighter than
the lamb, which would rise from his altar covered with flowers and fruits.


THE HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSE - Chapter VIII

 Similar to Cain, Abel had become too adult, fell in love with his younger sister - the one
who from childhood had been bound to him by ties of intimate affection. Together they
walked through the fields, keeping the flock, while considering with interest the
teachings of love written in nature. Adam and Eve as well as the Creator and his hosts
faithful found comfort and hope in the experience of these two young people who have
never failed to reflect the eyes the flame heated that altar which indicated them bloody
path of redemption. Cain, in his longing to be a home, joining the one he loved, came
finally to his parents, asking it would present to him his request, and wait for the
manifestation of His will. Adam the kindly father who interceded every day at the altar by
his family, and a special way for those kids who ventured into a path of delusions
presented with sadness the request of Cain to the Eternal of Light. Him await the
manifestation of His will on this important step in the bosom of humanity. Cain and his
beloved sister, now eagerly awaiting the day of sacrifice, when they could surely have an
encounter with the One who created all things. Were convinced that he would not refuse
the realization of his dream and manifest support for his ideal of worship. The sun
declined to the end of that sixth day, giving way to the darkness of one more Saturday.
The whole family gathered reverently at the altar, while Adam preparing the lamb for the
sacrifice. Would the Creator in response to the desire of this young couple?! This
question weighed upon them all, and in particular on Cain and his sister companion. The
Lord heard the request of Cain presented through Adam, and was ready to manifest
Himself in response to this demand. weighed about your Being, however, a great
sadness, because I cannot bless this young couple with the fullness of happiness and
which sought to obtain peace in that union. Only a true marriage could give them these
virtues. The Creator established marriage as a sacred trust, of eternal significance. The
union of the couple, under the blessing of the Eternal, should symbolize the spiritual
union between God and humans. Marriage, therefore, lose their sense prefigurative, for
those who despised symbol of that union, found that since the fall of man, its
culmination in the sacrifice of the lamb. Eternal had determined to teach through the
wedding ceremony, the truth essential that only through the death of the Messiah, in
time, he would marry if the human race, in an eternal covenant of peace. Therefore, His
blessing could only be obtained by those who submit If the symbolic ritual. The lamb
bound on the altar, he felt through his chest knife stone, after causing him pain deep
plunged in the darkness of death. About the blood flows out of its agony, a light that was
born immediately became intense, even frighten all darkness that covered that hill. Amid
the glare, the family gathered can distinguish the glorious presence of the Creator who
meekly bowed about them, with his friendly smile. The happiness of meeting was
enormous because it had been years since his last appearance, which occurred during
the birth of Abel. For them, therefore, that meeting was very special. After warmly
welcome this family, the Eternal communicated to them that could be the new joy. told
them that he had heard the request for Cain, who presented him out by Adam, and had
come with the purpose of guiding them about the steps that should take to achieve that
dream. First became aware of the responsibility they assume in front of him and the
whole universe, because in their spontaneous union, would bring children into the world,
which should be instructed in the way of salvation. He told them also of the functions
that would play in its new home. Cain, like Adam, was a priest and teacher; should
therefore build an altar to offer sacrifices on it. His companion, in the likeness of his
kindly mother, should be submissive and always ready to assist you with daily chores.
With joy, Cain and his companion of Yahweh heard these words of guidance and approval
to marriage. Abel and his companion to the feet of the Creator listened attentively to His
words of approval to the marriage of brothers looked at each other driven by an intense
desire to form also a home where following the example of parents could play a ministry
of love. Reading in his eyes the desire born in the heart, the Eternal with a smile
enveloped in his arms, and told them that they could also build your altar. Tears of
emotion, Abel and his sister fell down at the feet of the Creator, thanking Him for giving
them so sacred gift. The Lord began to guide those young people about the ceremony
that entwine. Ordered them again to build the altar. Cain build his altar, and his Abel.
Each prepare a special deal, to offer a sacrifice on the night precede the next dawn
Saturday. The approval and blessing of Yahweh to marriage, would manifest itself in the
presence of fire that would arise upon the altar. Illuminated by the glow of the divine
presence, their union would be sealed before the whole universe, are considered from
this act, one flesh. This union begets life, would be a perfect symbolism of eternal union
with the human being, because the Savior's sacrifice. With these guidelines and orders of
the Eternal, it became clear to those young pretenders to marriage, that the only
acceptable offering, which could bring the blessing of true unity, it would be a sacrificial
lamb. Amid the jubilation that family, the light of Yahweh dissipated finally Him out of
their eyes. In light of the altar, remained cheerful to talk about that future happiness
beckoned them now so close. The sun finally came, bringing in its warm rays of a dawn
breeze to gentle kiss their face with the scent of Eden bringing them to mind the
emotions of that first dream of Adam. Walking through the fertile fields shadow the hill,
the little family, following instructions of the Eternal, has to draw the boundaries of their
homes. Cain, being the eldest, chose the flowery fields that stretched to the right of the
home of his parents; Ali, very soon, will help build your altar. While Cain and his
companion remained within the limits of your future home, making plans for their future,
Abel and his younger sister followed in the footsteps of their parents until they reach the
fields that stretched to the left of the altar of Adam. were happy because in their pastoral
occupation, there always find green pastures watered by soda fountains. After defining
the sacred place of the altar, where in the heat of the first calls would live a more
intimate union, Abel and his companion strolled happy for their fields where lambs
grazed; Ali loved the great Yahweh that to marry humanity in eternal covenant of life, If
you would lamb in the person of the Messiah, to shed His blood atoning sacrifice. The
dawn of the first day of the week finally awakened those engaged for a week would be
plenty of activities: They should build altars and prepare their new homes. began
working with spirits, aided by parents. After plow and prepare certain places, gathered
the stones with which carefully constructed altars. Prepared then their homes, planting
shrubs to serve as protective wall. Such preparations were extended until the fifth day.
Now awaiting the sixth day, when the offer to prepare the altar - that offer in its
acceptance would unite in holy matrimony. The light of the sixth day finally dawned,
bringing a significant day for that family. Cain and Abel, along with her companions, had
been taught from childhood on the path of obedience. They had also received direct
guidance of the Eternal with respect to the true sacrifice. Now, were observed by all
intelligent beings of the vast universe, that day of trial. If called attention to the painful
path of lamb, would be united in marriage solemn significance if rejected follow him,
would not meet the approval, nor wished to receive the blessing. Abel and his younger
sister, walked happily toward the flock, which chose the most beautiful lamb, taking it as
an offering to the Eternal. Meanwhile, Cain and his partner, with determination
addressed the orchards, picking there the most beautiful fruits and flowers, to offer upon
the altar. Eternal and his subjects saddened up against the attitude of Cain. The offer
prepared, consisted of a demonstration of rebellion before the plan of redemption.
Rejecting the sacrifice of blood, were belittling the only way by which humans could
return to paradise of eternal life. The sun finally fell on the horizon, bringing in their
afterglow, as a last appeal to the young Cain, the memory of his steps that evening when
he returned home. Would have been retained in the jungle that night, it was not the light
of the sacrificial lamb. This memory plunged him into deep inner struggle. would accept
his offering of flowers and fruits?! Is not it better back in their footsteps, taking a lamb to
the altar?! Invisible to the eyes of Cain, legions of angels sought to influence him in his
solemn decision. In his spiritual struggle, came close to abandoning his plans, but his
pride finally repelled this option: it would be humiliating to those heights, confess to his
sister and her family, the inconsistency of his theology. While gazing at the horizon the
last glimpse of afterglow, Cain breaking the appeal of the Eternal Spirit, reaffirmed in its
decision: would offer flowers and fruits in place of a lamb, ushering in a new kind of
worship that certainly could be accepted by Eternal. Darkness slowly lowered over that
hill to cover it in like a thick blanket. The moment was indeed important because
decisions of life and death were manifest itself. What was at stake in positioning human,
was the fate of the universe. In the footsteps of rebellious Cain and his companion saw
the followers of the Eternal is a great danger that could complicate and endanger the
success of the plan of redemption. Became aware that night, that Satan and his hosts,
seek to lead humanity to erroneous forms of worship, based on philosophies attractive as
those fruits and flowers picked by Cain, but in essence it would be a denial of the only
way of salvation, represented by death of the lamb. Tonight, two new couples, moved by
the deepest longing, presented themselves before the Creator with their offerings.
Acceptance heavenly undrawn for them a path of happiness, in response to your most
cherished dreams. Their union in the light of the altar, to bring them a glimpse of the
future glories - those that will be enjoyed by the redeemed - the joy of being forever
united to the Redeemer, Lover Spouse of the human soul. Not approving the offer, bring
bitter disappointment, as well as not receiving the blessing of the Creator, they would
realize they are treading a path of rebellion, disconnected from the Author of life. It was
with a mixture of joy and sorrow, that Adam and Eve went to the altar that night,
testifying about the same the sheep for sacrifice. After so many years together with their
children, in which by word and example, sought to show way of salvation, now gathered
responses of obedience and disobedience. They were happy to Abel, Cain and sad. What
else could he do for rebellious son?! In a last attempt to make him recognize his error, by
taking Adam in his arms supply, groped looming up to the altar of Cain. Ali, tears bathe
the face, pleaded with his son to take one lamb for sacrifice. If you accept his entreaties,
would arise the fire of divine blessing, otherwise remain immersed in darkness. Cain
arrogantly spurned the offer of his father, claiming that his altar would never be tainted
by the blood of innocent animals. Wounded by rebellion and ingratitude of his son, Adam
returned to his altar, where Eva along with continued interceding for the future of their
children. The moment of trial arrived. entire universe was attentive. At the heart of all
the children of light was a mixture of joy and sadness: joy for the offering of Abel, and
sadness for confirmation in the way of Cain's rebellion. Like his father, Abel stood with
trembling hands lamb unresisting. From childhood they clung to these innocent and pure
animals, seeing them as a symbol of the Savior. His attachment to the lambs, led him to
become a pastor. He shuddered at the thought of having to sacrifice one little pet, but
knew no other way to approach the Eternal. Only his death could unseal the flame
acceptance, blessing for their marriage. Witnessed from childhood the painful act of
sacrifice, but now, when your hands should strike the blow, he hesitated. Taken by deep
anguish at his duty, bowed his forehead into inconsolable tears. Cain, moved by the
desire of the union would follow the flame of victory, raised his hands over the flowers
and fruits, invisible on the altar in darkness. Secure the divine approval, turned his eyes
to heaven, and beheld the glow of the stars. She was glad to know that in response to
your offer, another star would appear to unite those with their brilliance. Adam with his
hand raised in prayer crying, lamenting the destruction of Cain. Lamb rejected why?!
What could have done more to make him understand that his way was the sin?! Sure we
had exhausted all means to help you; Adam tilted his head after strike the killing blow.
The flame of acceptance immediately lit her face marked by tears. Comforted by the
glow of the flame that burned on the altar of his father, Abel a painful effort raised a
hand carrying the knife death - who in his fall descerraria them the undeserved blessing,
after causing the pain. While still remained pale and trembling hesitant in their darkness,
Cain across the flame burning on the altar of forgiveness of his father, claimed by the
divine light. Confident be pleasing the Creator with his offering, prayed: - Lord, Creator
and King Universal Thy kingdom is light and joy Thou art victorious like the sun traverses
the sky, involving all nature with its robe of light, causing it to awaken colorful, thriving in
life. The you that you do with your love shine on, uniting under rays your life, bring you
these flowers and fruits that are products of that union. Accepts them as symbols of our
victory, and shine upon our altar flame of eternal blessing. "Abel, moved by a deep pain,
chest finally dug lamb that instrument of death, making him fall asleep forever.
Momentum in the blow, and fell to the ground where it took dying, reflecting on the
meaning of that sacrifice. Could now understand the agony that his father experienced in
all those nights of sacrifice. Cain that silent waiting to answer your prayer, unsettled by
the delay. His restlessness has finally become desperate, seeing develop beyond the call
of blessing down upon the altar of his brother. Then Taken by emotions of sadness and
anger, shouted to the heavens: - Lord, Lord, did not you hear me?! Do not answer me?!
His entreaties, however, brought no response beyond a hollow echo, lost that night.
Beaten by the shame of the tragedy, Cain fell, wallowing in inconsolable tears. Satan
rejoiced to witness the despair of Cain that with groans cursing the Creator for not
having spoken out on the altar. Partied to have got through deception Cain lead again
before the Universe to manifest their rebellion. Was also glad to see that Cain was not
alone in his fall, but he had his sister follow in her footsteps. Now fight to keep them
captive in his power, making them sworn enemies of the Eternal and his followers. The
Creator, although saddened by the disobedience of Cain, rejoiced in being able to honor
before the universe that couple obedient, the sacrificial lamb, saw the promise of a
Redeemer to be born in the future redemption of all sinners who would accept it.Abel
and his companion after consoling yourself the pain of blow, bathed by the warm rays of
that flame, united in sublime act of love, one that could generate life. Punished Adam
and Eve who had predicted the harsh disappointment of Cain and his companion,
attracted by her moans, fumbled in the darkness until to neighbor up your altar lifeless.
Ali, driven by a great desire to change their luck, tried to convince them to offer a lamb,
yet time was opportune to them and if they wanted to, they could seek the pasture the
flock, taking a lamb to the altar. Driven by pride, Cain and his sister rejected the advice
of parents who only wanted their happiness. Whimper brooding on his bitter
disappointment, Cain remained the rest of the night to wallowing there was the favorite
son - the one who will not tolerate from childhood. Why would he be more worthy?! Why
would enjoy greater privileges?! Inspired by the evil spirit, when the sun was just
dawning, Cain began to devise a terrible crime. Said to him: - If I am not worthy to live in
the light of divine blessing, nor my brother will, I will wait for the opportune moment to
clear your eyes all the glitz of happiness. Revealing the sun finally dawned with a light
face upset of Cain. Which change! Not shone your eyes from happiness at dusk?! All
hosts of light were concerned with the unfortunate situation of Cain. Knew that in his
decisive rebellion, Satan the sink increasingly greater despair. Knowing the Creator the
evil plans of Cain expressed to him at dawn, in order to help you understand your need.
invisible to the rest of the family, the Eternal spoke to Cain and extending His helping
hand on him, asked him: - Son, by are you so angry?! In response, Cain pointing to the
altar covered with flowers and fruits, replied: - I'm hurt that you have not accepted this
offer which offered so faithfully. With words full of compassion, the Creator explained to
him again human need of salvation, which could be attained only through His sacrifice,
which was symbolized by the immolation of the lamb. Told him that his offer of gratitude
could only be accepted after the blood sacrifice. Conformed not to the words of Eternal,
Cain sought to justify himself. His words, however, revealed that the great grief of a
wounded pride, were finally interrupted by final counsel of Yahweh, which extended him
a unique opportunity to break away from their spiritual bondage: - There is only a path
Cain, who is of sacrifice. If you proceed as your brother, will also be accepted and
blessed with the flame of blessing; If, however, proceed evil shall have sealed his fate
from the jaws of death. Solemnly affirm after these words the eternal farewell to his son,
by becoming invisible.




HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSE - Chapter IX
 Words of Eternal Cain plunged into the most terrible inner struggle. On one side of Satan
and his hosts struggled to stop him in his slavery, the other Yahweh and his hosts,
sought awaken that heart in struggle, recognizing the only path to salvation. Cain,
restless in his thoughts and tortured by the weight of responsibility resting upon them, as
his steps would be followed by many other came sometimes to think of surrender, taking
for himself a lamb. But that thought was soon banished, replaced by another of hatred
and revenge.
In his agonizing struggle, when the sun had walked to the west announcing another dark
night, overcome by pride Cain took the tragic decision: Never accept the plan of
redemption symbolized by the lamb on the altar. This decision, which Arrow painful tore
the heart of the Eternal and his hosts. Making them prostrate in mourning for the sad
destruction of that beloved son. It was terrible to think that many in the great conflict
unfolding the throne of the universe, they would follow the footsteps of Cain. Ceased
battle, Cain rose up with a smirk on his lips. Would not have more conflict in your
consciousness! There would be more disturbed by the idea of sacrifice! Fight now, and
build with their wisdom and strength, a haven of peace and prosperity. Another night
came, bringing with their darkness insomnia a crazy adventure, inhuman and cruel,
which was now planned by Cain. With heart dominated by evil, told himself that night,
which was the first of the week: - Once daybreak will visit the home of Abel. Pretending
to be sorry, I will ask him a lamb for my altar. I will ask him to accompany me to the flock
that overnight in distant pastures, I know he will gladly serve me. When in our footsteps,
we find ourselves far from home, I will understand the pain felt by lambs. After you kill
him, hide in the forest, far from the reach of your partner's eyes and their parents. Then
will celebrate its end, joining to my companion, as he did after the death of the lamb.
When you see the sunset - the one with your afterglow no more Abel bring to your home
with my sister-flee to the valley where once returned, and there never return to this
hostile hill where lambs perish without guilt. We walk so until we reach the cradle of
light, which extends in the plain of Eden. Ali, away from the entreaties and advice that
my father intolerable, offer to the Eternal of light, cults of flowers and fruits: products
that are born under its glow. The sun hides its march, announced the distant horizon the
signs of dawn, a glare that is reflected by a cloud, made her like a cloak bathed He
apologized saying he would keep his purpose never stain the altar with blood innocent
animals, but fulfill the divine will, sacrificing a lamb to achieve the blessing on their
marriage, but would distant field. After fulfilling this commitment, would return to her,
and would thereafter become one flesh. Abel rejoiced that morning next to your loved
one with a smile awakened as from a dream, reclined his chest where a heart beat which
she could not imagine, send that day, in a last ditch effort, the sap of life , never to
return.Abel would like a lamb on the altar. After stick with the instrument of death, with
Cain steps moved by a decision would not be revoked, bypass to the house of their
fathers, approaching the home of Abel that even the foot of the altar, stood with his
companion, exchanging vows of eternal love. 's gaze tenderly Abel, under the glow of
dawn brought a reminder that girl that moved. Stroking his face covered by his beard
which soft wool, her lips trembling with emotion, he whispered: - Honey, your look is to
me like the look of a lamb: brings me security, peace and hope. I am grateful to be able
to contemplate these eyes that shine the love! All I want is that they never close to me!
With excitement Abel kissed his partner after hearing his words of affection, and replied
with a smile: - Honey, the only death can close, but even death cannot Sierra them
forever, for the eternal dawn, they will open for you with a glow that will never be
undone by this shadow! Abel said these words, when steps were heard Cain Abel
consented willingly Walking toward the flock, Abel asked his brother who waited there
while take a lamb fat for your altar. Hearing no answer of Cain, Abel looked behind, and
was surprised to see that the countenance of Cain was upset and his eyes did not
express gratitude, but anger. Abel turning to him, asked him why he is unhappy. Yahweh
told him that she loved him, and since he was determined to offer Him a lamb, their
marriage would be blessed and would enjoy peace of soul. In response to the loving
words of Abel, Cain said coldly: - You are the lamb that I want to sacrifice "After you do
this cruel statement, Cain took of her inner wears a stone knife and advanced on his
brother that pale besought him, striking him a deep blow to the face. Blood immediately
gushed like a lamb, making Abel tremble with fear. Would have gotten the day testifying
life?! While inquired with a groan, felt another blow that the violence in his toppled to the
ground. In his mind stunned by grief, in a last effort of his conscience, remember those
exchanged vows of love at dawn. Rave On his death, he seemed to hear his beloved to
tell you lips trembling with emotion: - Honey, your gaze is like the gaze of a lamb ...; All I
hope is that they will never be close to me! Revive so with effort, his last kiss
accompanied by his promise that made her smile: - Only the death can close, but even
she cannot sawing forever, since the dawn of eternal day they will open for you with a
glow that will never be undone by this shadow. Remember After this oath Love, Abel won
by a fatal blow, plunged into darkness unconscious, sure that soon this shadow would be
banned from their eyes, on the day of resurrection. Cain only ceased to strike his brother,
after making sure that he was really lifeless. Then dragged him into the forest, leaving
him there covered with foliage grass. Returning to his home, Cain showed to his
companion the bloodstains on his hands, and said he had answered the divine request,
sacrificing a lamb. Now were free to join in the Eternal's blessing. Overdue by carnal
passion, then joined in the glow of that sun has not shone for Abel. When the sun tinged
the horizon with its afterglow, Cain remembering his crime rose startled, and said to his
companion that in his sacrifice, promised the Eternal of light present their flowers and
fruits as an offering of gratitude for the blessing achieved. This offering should be offered
in the currencies of Eden during the dawn. They needed, therefore, leave immediately.
Without questioning the will of her husband, the young woman hastily gathered his
clothes and offering of gratitude, and departed into the night. Cain was in a hurry
because he knew that the absence of Abel that night would bring revelation of his crime,
which he intended to always hide your wife. Bathed by light from afterglow, that young
wife smiled, certain that hug your Abel before night. Contemplating the sun in its decline
over the meadows where expected to see him back, fondly remembered dawn light
revealed that in his eyes of her husband, tenderhearted as a lamb. Moved by it to
remember the order that you had a whisper: - All I want is your eyes never close to me.
Remember your loving response: - Dear, only death can close them, but even this cannot
clench them forever, for the eternal dawn they will open for you with a glow that never is
undone by this shadow. “With this memory, the young wife finally saw the sun dip into
his tomb of death and life, with his last flare involving the plain and empty your heart to
throb with longing also remain empty. Frowning with concern that young woman asked: -
Why not come my beloved?! Driven by the desire, ran to the house of their fathers,
which imagined the encounter. Calling it, but heard no response beyond the noise of the
footsteps of their parents, onlookers came to meet him, asking: - Daughter, you looking
for Abel? He has not arrived yet? No, - said the daughter, now in tears, - he has not
arrived yet! Although concerned, those parents embraced her daughter looking console
her, saying that he would soon be in your arms. In a veiled concern, then asked his
daughter: - Some time ago he left? - Shortly after awake at dawn - responded. In this
reply, followed a silence disquieting questions while trying to discern together in vain his
figure bathed meadow under that last bit of light. Sighing deeply, Adam already
suspecting a possible evil, asked his daughter: - He came alone? Sobbing she said: - Cain
awoke in the morning, asking for a lamb, and Abel went out with him. Worried, Adam
went silent and went into the house of Cain. Calling there for him, heard no response.
Then broke through the foliage to the inside of that cabin, where he read the sad empty
presage painful betrayal, confirmed in a robe stained with blood, erasing in the shadows.
Overcome by anguish, Adam fell to the ground breaking into tears; Do not wanting,
however, reveal his desperation to his daughter and wife who needed solace to
overcome that sad night, Adam in a huge effort wiped tears and steadied him against
emotions, to hear footsteps approaching them. Outside, Eva and her daughter hopeful of
finding there visiting Abel his brother, asked: - They are there daddy? The hopeful voice
of his daughter in the middle of that night, which was arrow bleeding heart, and feared
to answer your question. Finally, he walked toward her daughter, and seeing her suffers
by the absence of his companion, tried to console her by saying: - Daughter, trust in the
power of the Creator. He will take care of it, and bring the dawn! Words of comfort from
Adam, however, far from mourning soften that young, dipped it in more pain, making her
relive memories on the promise of Abel uttered that morning, he had said that someday
his eyes were erased by death, they would open for her at the dawn of eternal Sabbath.
Cain and his companion in his footsteps hurried escape, finally met distant hill, immersed
in the valley of darkness that never deliver back to those parents suffering his rebellious
sons. Cain now, beside his wife, boasted up mocking of darkness, promising to undo it
soon with his strength. Overcome by fatigue, fell to the ground, where they remained
dormant until awakened by the dawn. Redone fatigue, continued the journey on the path
of adventure, in steps that Cain did remember that walk interrupted by inconsistency.
How foolish he had been, he thought, to give ear to the voice of the angel! If there were
continued on their mission, possibly already have a paradise bathed in eternal light.
Daylight faded when the fugitive couple reached the valley of bones, place Impatiently,
Cain revealed that currencies were in Eden, where he met once with the angel. Having
said this, he pointed to the left adding: - Let us in this direction, because I do not want to
meet him again. Taking her by the arm, walked fast, and enjoying the last light of the
afterglow. When at last his steps could not be taken without difficulty because of
darkness, gazed through the foliage a glow that, more intense than the sun, stood for a
moment, fading. Property next to Cain, his wife, curious asked: - You did? - Yes, Cain
replied shaking. - What is it? At this question, Cain did not answer, simply took her by the
hand and said: - Let us return. Let us flee from the light that can kill. Without
understanding the mystery, the young wife followed in quick, here and there, were
prevented by tripping the cast to the ground. In this escape, however, failed to dodge
the glare that came before them stronger eye. Amazed While trying to escape in a last
ditch effort in another direction, were arrested by a strong hand, revealing his eyes
revealed before them face the Eternal, brighter than the sun. Not knowing how to face
Him in His light justice, Cain feared being punished for his crime, he bowed his head in
his hands. The Creator then asked him earnestly: - Where is Abel your brother?! How
insist on this question, Cain embarrassed by having to confess his terrible crime before
his companion, who wanted to hide, simply replied - I do not know. Am I my brother's
keeper?! Outraged by this response contempt and recklessness, the Eternal told him
firmly: - What did Cain! The voice of your brother's blood cries out to me from the
ground. Now - continued Yahweh - be damned this earth that received the innocent blood
of his brother. With voice full of sadness, the Eternal continued: - To this day, the cover of
blessings, prospering your labor on earth, giving him pleasure in this realization, since
now, I cannot bless it, because spontaneous rebellion by you closed channels this
blessing. Therefore, always walk on bum this cursed land your fault, fugitive light of this
face that always smiled her forgiveness and salvation won by defiance to topple into the
eternal night. After revealing his sad and hopeless situation, the Creator raised his voice,
and wept bitterly. Hard to dismiss him was death that son loved it, by the insistent
rebellion had sealed their eternal destiny. Cain trembling gripped by fear and horror for
their deplorable condition, desperately cried out to Yahweh: - Volta Lord back! Give me
just a blessing! Moved by His infinite love, the Eternal became to Cain's shaky He spoke
of his fear: - I'm afraid of the dangers of the forest, and those who want to look me in the
future to avenge the blood of my brother who poured”. The Creator Cain had
compassion, promising him protection. As a sign of this promise, stroked his face,
making him disappear abundant beard. Later this gesture of loving father caressing her
son even in eternal departure, Cain saw disappear before his eyes glare that face bathed
with tears, produced by their ingratitude. A night of despair and tears were finally
banned by the glow of a new dawn with your light to reveal sadness even greater. Even
before the sun showed its face on the eastern valley, a young widow with her parents
rushed walked across the fields toward the pasture where the herd was grazing in those
days. With my heart still pounding hope they saw in the distance the herd. Summoned
there for Abel, but their voices brought no response beyond a hollow echo. Their eyes
then discerned through the tears, the marks of pain, that lawn crumpled and covered in
blood. Overdue by sadness, painfully followed the bloodstains, until they found his body
torn, grass covered under that flies. Faced with this scene from terrible humiliation,
raised their voices in cries of fear, unable to bear the pain of separation. Ali remained in
agony, until they saw the sun fall over in his most melancholy evening. That how painful
was the thought of having to return home, leaving behind the beloved Abel falling apart
in your cold night. Remembering his childhood, when his bed covered him with love,
promising to wake him at dawn with a kiss, those parents with a painful effort the
covered again with that grass, knowing that at the dawn of the eternal day would kiss in
her happy in its wake. Struggling finally left that place already taken the night and
touched up toward those empty houses whose walls would no longer flowering joy for
them. Overcome by the horror of the last revelation, Cain's wife bowed low in fainting,
comes to awaken shortly after leaving the Eternal. Ali in the darkness, he remembered
the terrible revelation of God, and was possessed of great fear. Feared not only darkness,
but mostly to Cain. Thought to scream for help, but who would save her?! Dominated by
these feelings, was attentive, waiting for dawn revealed beside her sleeping body of
someone who did not look like Cain. Startled, fearing wake him, walked a few steps
leaning against a tree trunk, where she remained until she saw him raise his smooth
face, calling her. Recognizing the voice of her husband, moved into their direction, but
soon stopped dominated by fear. Inquiring into his heart about the mystery of her face
now smooth, said: - I am afraid to approach me from you! After expressing his fear,
revealed another higher: - I'm also afraid to run away from you! Rising with a smile, Cain
asked her: - Why do you fear me? - Why fear death, replied afflicted. - Me too, until
yesterday was like you, afraid of death I told him Cain. - Now do not fear more? Inquired
him his wife. - Do not fear, Cain replied, rubbing his smooth face. - But banning him his
fear? Asked her young, fearing even closer. - Seeing my face now smooth? This is the
sign of a promise made by the Eternal. - What promise? Asked his companion, now
approaching without fear. Cain spoke to him of the promised blessing and confirmed that
signal, which would share it too, if followed in his footsteps. Would not find safety and
life, however, going into him. Comforted by the promise of guaranteed protection in the
smooth face of her husband, the young woman followed a long contour walk to Eden.
Planned to transpose it, reaching the eastern valley that stretched beyond its
impenetrable meadow; Ali would build an altar establishing your new home. Cain and his
companion on his journey finally reached a valley covered by dense forest stretched
eastward of paradise. Ali looks hostile environment that would have feared the promise
was not marked on the face of Cain. Craving find beyond a better place, built an altar
provisional where at the dawn of the first day of a new week, offered to the Eternal
revealed the face of the sun, flowers and fruit - symbols of fertility. Under the light of
dawn teamed up again at the ceremony commemorating victory have found that
thought. After joining his wife, Cain raised them before the altar dedicated to the Eternal
represented by the sun, your home. Asked that became fruitful to give many children the
right to contemplate his face shining. Cain concluded his prayer of consecration, with a
promise confirmed by a sign, saying: - If you look on our supplication, bringing in thy
brightness fertility build altars where we walk in honor of you, where we worship with
offerings of gratitude. As a token of our allegiance, to consecrate your worship, this day
we leagues under thy light, which we'll call you by your name: The SUN DAY.
